---
semanticScholarId: "000fafdf58a346ef267f51d665eb11bec9ddf812"
bibKey: null
year: 2022
title: "Development of the supply system, control algorithm and architecture of verbal robot"
doi: "10.47533/2020.1606-146x.139"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: false
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Engineering"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Development of the supply system, control algorithm and architecture of verbal robot

**Year:** [[2022]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/engineering|Engineering]]
**Authors:** C. Kenshimov; T. Sundetov; M. Kunelbayev; S. Ixanov; M. Mansurova

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/000fafdf58a346ef267f51d665eb11bec9ddf812)
- [PDF](https://doi.org/10.47533/2020.1606-146x.139)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.47533/2020.1606-146x.139)

## Abstract

This work is supported by grant from the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan within the framework of the Work №AP08053034 «Development of new methods for modeling and recognition of Kazakh sign language», Institute Information and Computational Technologies CS MES RK. This article reviews the supply system, control algorithm and architecture of verbal robot. The robot is based on publicly available 3D printer. In this research was developed architecture of general programme system of verbal robot, also improved supply system and control algorithm of overall system. Using Jetson Tx1 equipment and a touch screen for interaction with InMoov, an interface was made to control the entire system. The Kinect detector plays a major role in the process of studying this topic. Compared with the existing humanoid robots, the verbal robot is highly automated platform, low cost and fully functional.

## TL;DR

In this research, architecture of general programme system of verbal robot was developed, also improved supply system and control algorithm of overall system and the Kinect detector plays a major role in the process of studying this topic.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Kenshimov2022DevelopmentOT,
 author = {C. Kenshimov and T. Sundetov and M. Kunelbayev and S. Ixanov and M. Mansurova},
 booktitle = {Bulletin of the National Engineering Academy of the Republic of Kazakhstan},
 journal = {Bulletin of the National Engineering Academy of the Republic of Kazakhstan},
 title = {Development of the supply system, control algorithm and architecture of verbal robot},
 year = {2022}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
