---
semanticScholarId: "00173905ef6efc2a0e0d9016f7119259b1f92c7a"
bibKey: null
year: 2022
title: "A Systematic Review of Machine Learning Approaches for Classifying Indian Sign Language Gestures and Facial Expressions"
doi: "10.1109/ICIRCA54612.2022.9985747"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# A Systematic Review of Machine Learning Approaches for Classifying Indian Sign Language Gestures and Facial Expressions

**Year:** [[2022]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** M. Bajwa; G. Gandhi

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00173905ef6efc2a0e0d9016f7119259b1f92c7a)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIRCA54612.2022.9985747)

## Abstract

Indian Sign Language is the primary mode of communication known to persons who use Indian Sign Language for people who have hearing or language deficits. Different types of machine learning models are used to broaden the scope of communication for those with impairments and illiteracy. There are numerous machine learning models for analyzing gestures, postures, and facial recognition in Indian Sign Language for single-handed and double-handed signals. The present study on hand gestures, recognition, and translation intends to build an essential foundation for developing a platform to facilitate communication for the s pecially-abled with anyone. Machine learning algorithms generally focus on letter recognition or a few fundamental indicators. Communication is essential for exchanging ideas, thoughts, and feelings. Sign language is a kind of communication that uses hand motions. This is aimed toward those with impairments such as muteness and deafness. Machine learning, a branch of artificial intelligence, will aid in identifying various hand motions and predicting the language created by those inputs based on those inputs[2]. Sign language has a grammar that is unique from and independent of English. When compared to English, SL allows for far more freedom in word order. Tense is marked morphologically on verbs in English, but SL (like many other languages, such as Indian Sign Language) communicates tense lexically using temporal adverbs. The structure of ISL and English differs at the phonological level as well. Signed languages, like spoken languages, include a degree of sublexical structure that includes segments and combinatorial rules; however, phonological elements are manual rather than vocal. The way spatial information is conveyed in English and ISL differs substantially. All Deaf people are illiterate in written English. As an output, the SL text can be produced. SL is just physically executed English, where English and SL share the identical linguistic structure-that one is a straight encoding of the other. Many software designers mistakenly believe that deaf users can always access printed the English language in a user interface. Many designers feel that if auditory information is also supplied as written English, the deaf user's demands will be addressed. Prepositions such as “in,” “on,” and “under” are used to indicate locative information in English, as in many other spoken languages. On the other hand, SL encodes locative and motion information via verbal classifier formulations in which hand shape morphemes define item type, and the location of the hands in signing space schematically depicts the spatial relationship between two things. Thus, English and ASL differ significantly in phonological, morphological, and syntactic areas.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Conference{Bajwa2022ASR,
 author = {M. Bajwa and G. Gandhi},
 booktitle = {2022 4th International Conference on Inventive Research in Computing Applications (ICIRCA)},
 journal = {2022 4th International Conference on Inventive Research in Computing Applications (ICIRCA)},
 pages = {848-853},
 title = {A Systematic Review of Machine Learning Approaches for Classifying Indian Sign Language Gestures and Facial Expressions},
 year = {2022}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
