---
semanticScholarId: "005bf0aa7d9761ed1a52dc97331b64c31c88a643"
bibKey: null
year: 2017
title: "Sign Language Interpreters: Perception Analysis about Working with Deaf Students in a Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology in the Northern Region of Brazil"
doi: "10.4236/CE.2017.84050"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Psychology", "Education", "Linguistics", "Sociology"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Sign Language Interpreters: Perception Analysis about Working with Deaf Students in a Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology in the Northern Region of Brazil

**Year:** [[2017]]
**Topics:** [[topics/psychology|Psychology]], [[topics/education|Education]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]], [[topics/sociology|Sociology]]
**Authors:** César Gomes de Freitas; C. Delou; Gildete Amorim; Edilene de Melo Teixeira; H. Castro

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/005bf0aa7d9761ed1a52dc97331b64c31c88a643)
- [PDF](http://www.scirp.org/journal/PaperDownload.aspx?paperID=75901)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4236/CE.2017.84050)

## Abstract

The interpreters of Sign Language have an essential role in the education of deaf students in all countries including Brazil. They mediate the whole teaching and learning process as they are responsible for the communication between teachers and students. Due to their important role, their performance has direct implications in the student’s academic success as well as in the process of their inclusion in the society, which begins at early age at school. In the present study we investigated the perception of Brazilian interpreters that work in a Federal Institute of education, science and technology in the northern region of Brazil. Thus we analyzed their opinion about different aspects involving their work with students with hearing disabilities in this institution. On that purpose we employed a quali-quantitative approach by using a questionnaire with structured and non-structured questions. According to the interpreters’ point of view, some actions still have to be done to achieve the effective inclusion of students with hearing impairment in the educational institution evaluated. On that matter the work of interpreters should be more recognized as important for the teaching and learning process of deaf students leading to the improvement of their work conditions for attending them. These professionals also reported the importance of teachers learning sign language for improving the psychological aspects of these students and their perception of the institution acceptance.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Freitas2017SignLI,
 author = {César Gomes de Freitas and C. Delou and Gildete Amorim and Edilene de Melo Teixeira and H. Castro},
 journal = {Creative Education},
 pages = {657-665},
 title = {Sign Language Interpreters: Perception Analysis about Working with Deaf Students in a Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology in the Northern Region of Brazil},
 volume = {08},
 year = {2017}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
