---
semanticScholarId: "008d5c99e346df65e1814e64d9fdb4932e0d3d78"
bibKey: null
year: 2020
title: "Avaliação da compreensão de surdos através de fábula em Libras"
doi: "10.5902/1984686x43044"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Psychology", "Education", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Avaliação da compreensão de surdos através de fábula em Libras

**Year:** [[2020]]
**Topics:** [[topics/psychology|Psychology]], [[topics/education|Education]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Mariana Peres de Morais; C. B. F. D. Lacerda

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/008d5c99e346df65e1814e64d9fdb4932e0d3d78)
- [PDF](https://doi.org/10.5902/1984686x43044)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.5902/1984686x43044)

## Abstract

In recent years, the impact of proposals aimed at encouraging programs for the bilingual education for the deaf entered Brazilian institutions with the objective of encourage deaf audiences to achieve teaching quality. Lots of research on bilingualism, language acquisition and literacy are fundamental to the development of language policies that enable deaf people to form themselves as citizens. For this reason, it becomes relevant to use competent pedagogical practices to evaluate them. However, with regard to the evaluation of school performance, there is more easily in the literature, assessment materials directed at the written language than those focused on sign languages. With this in mind, this research aims to objective to evaluate the understanding in Brazilian Sign Language of the deaf through a fable presented in Brazilian Sign Language. For this, a descriptive research was carried out with deaf participants residents in the central region of the State of Sao Paulo, aged 14 to 18 years. The results of this research work allowed to identify and analyze strengths and weaknesses of sign language users, in the aspects of understanding in Libras. That knowledge can help teachers who work with deaf students to create strategies aimed at the linguistic development of its students.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Morais2020AvaliaçãoDC,
 author = {Mariana Peres de Morais and C. B. F. D. Lacerda},
 journal = {Revista Educação Especial},
 title = {Avaliação da compreensão de surdos através de fábula em Libras},
 volume = {33},
 year = {2020}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
