---
semanticScholarId: "00a18a6a588b5d7270b83ba1e1852dcf9b93bdc1"
bibKey: null
year: 2016
title: "ATENDIMENTO AOS SURDOS NOS SERVIÇOS DE SAÚDE: ACESSIBILIDADE E OBSTÁCULOS"
doi: "10.14450/2318-9312.V28.E3.A2016.PP157-165"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: false
expanded: false
topics: ["Medicine", "Sociology", "Education"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# ATENDIMENTO AOS SURDOS NOS SERVIÇOS DE SAÚDE: ACESSIBILIDADE E OBSTÁCULOS

**Year:** [[2016]]
**Topics:** [[topics/medicine|Medicine]], [[topics/sociology|Sociology]], [[topics/education|Education]]
**Authors:** Dayane Bevilaqua Neves; Ilana Mirian Almeida Felipe; Serlyjane Penha Hermano Nunes

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00a18a6a588b5d7270b83ba1e1852dcf9b93bdc1)
- [PDF](http://revistas.cff.org.br/?journal=infarma&page=article&op=download&path%5B%5D=1713&path%5B%5D=pdf)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.14450/2318-9312.V28.E3.A2016.PP157-165)

## Abstract

This is a descriptive qualitative study aiming to understand the deaf people accessibility to health services, diagnosing problems and obstacles. Nine deaf patients were interviewed using the Brazilian Sign Language - LIBRAS, with the aid of an interpreter. The data were evaluated using the Content Analysis (Theme mode) technique, which five categories: communication, feelings, perceptions, accessibility and f autonomy. The data analysis revealed that there are a small number of health care professionals able to communicate using LIBRAS, and this fact complicates the communication between the patient and health workers. Moreover, deaf patients claim they rarely can find interpreters to assist them. Because the problems in establishing efficient communication, several Health services and information are inaccessible to deaf patients. Besides, the society still sees the deaf people as unable to make their own decisions regarding their health and therapy, keeping them dependent on others.

## TL;DR

The data analysis revealed that there are a small number of health care professionals able to communicate using LIBRAS, and this fact complicates the communication between the patient and health workers.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Inproceedings{Neves2016ATENDIMENTOAS,
 author = {Dayane Bevilaqua Neves and Ilana Mirian Almeida Felipe and Serlyjane Penha Hermano Nunes},
 pages = {157-165},
 title = {ATENDIMENTO AOS SURDOS NOS SERVIÇOS DE SAÚDE: ACESSIBILIDADE E OBSTÁCULOS},
 volume = {28},
 year = {2016}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
