---
semanticScholarId: "00b65ce196dcb4fa22cb3c051e2ced3306defab7"
bibKey: null
year: 2024
title: "Malaysian Sign Language Real-Time Tutorial using CNN Algorithm"
doi: "10.37934/araset.61.1.176192"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Education"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Malaysian Sign Language Real-Time Tutorial using CNN Algorithm

**Year:** [[2024]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/education|Education]]
**Authors:** Meor Adib Zakwan Meor Ahmad Fauzi; Yusliza Yusoff; A. Shafi; Toya Lazmin Khan; Nazihah Surati; Lele Mohammed; Shakeef Ahmed Rakin; Nicholas Jia Chern Pang; Zuriahati Mohd Yunos; Sharifah Zarith Rahmah Syed Ahmad

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00b65ce196dcb4fa22cb3c051e2ced3306defab7)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.37934/araset.61.1.176192)

## Abstract

The communication challenges faced by people with hearing and speech impairments in Malaysia are made worse by effective resources for learning Malaysian Sign Language (MSL). The Malaysian Sign Language Real Time Tutorial (MASRETT) is an instructional website designed to decrease the communication gap between both disabled and non-disabled. MASRETT is developed to assist in learning fundamental MSL virtually besides reducing the communication barriers which leads to a better and stronger social relation in Malaysia. Agile software development is the methodology of choice for creating this system since it facilitates the iterative identification and correction of mistakes. The artificial intelligence (AI) model which is convolutional Neural Network (CNN) algorithm is used to recognize the sign language input. The findings indicate that MASRETT significantly enhances accessibility and effectiveness of MSL learning particularly for individuals with lack access to traditional classes. However, the results showed that only 33% of the signatures are recognized using CNN algorithm for real time signs detection. It is observed that the results are not significant because of the limitation in data and inefficient model usage and can be improved using improved algorithm as in future work.

## TL;DR

The findings indicate that MASRETT significantly enhances accessibility and effectiveness of MSL learning, however, the results showed that only 33% of the signatures are recognized using CNN algorithm for real time signs detection.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Fauzi2024MalaysianSL,
 author = {Meor Adib Zakwan Meor Ahmad Fauzi and Yusliza Yusoff and A. Shafi and Toya Lazmin Khan and Nazihah Surati and Lele Mohammed and Shakeef Ahmed Rakin and Nicholas Jia Chern Pang and Zuriahati Mohd Yunos and Sharifah Zarith Rahmah Syed Ahmad},
 booktitle = {Journal of Advanced Research in Applied Sciences and Engineering Technology},
 journal = {Journal of Advanced Research in Applied Sciences and Engineering Technology},
 title = {Malaysian Sign Language Real-Time Tutorial using CNN Algorithm},
 year = {2024}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
