---
semanticScholarId: "00bbf704dab029bdadd74bd2260039c6880a3032"
bibKey: null
year: 2020
title: "Visual-Spatial Perspective-Taking in Spatial Scenes and in American Sign Language."
doi: "10.1093/deafed/enaa006"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Psychology", "Medicine", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "pdf"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: pdf
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Visual-Spatial Perspective-Taking in Spatial Scenes and in American Sign Language.

**Year:** [[2020]]
**Topics:** [[topics/psychology|Psychology]], [[topics/medicine|Medicine]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Kristen Secora; K. Emmorey

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00bbf704dab029bdadd74bd2260039c6880a3032)
- [PDF](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7673616)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/deafed/enaa006)

## Abstract

As spatial languages, sign languages rely on spatial cognitive processes that are not involved for spoken languages. Interlocutors have different visual perspectives of the signer's hands requiring a mental transformation for successful communication about spatial scenes. It is unknown whether visual-spatial perspective-taking (VSPT) or mental rotation (MR) abilities support signers' comprehension of perspective-dependent American Sign Language (ASL) structures. A total of 33 deaf ASL adult signers completed tasks examining nonlinguistic VSPT ability, MR ability, general ASL proficiency (ASL-Sentence Reproduction Task [ASL-SRT]), and an ASL comprehension test involving perspective-dependent classifier constructions (the ASL Spatial Perspective Comprehension Test [ASPCT] test). Scores on the linguistic (ASPCT) and VSPT tasks positively correlated with each other and both correlated with MR ability; however, VSPT abilities predicted linguistic perspective-taking better than did MR ability. ASL-SRT scores correlated with ASPCT accuracy (as both require ASL proficiency) but not with VSPT scores. Therefore, the ability to comprehend perspective-dependent ASL classifier constructions relates to ASL proficiency and to nonlinguistic VSPT and MR abilities.

## TL;DR

The ability to comprehend perspective-dependent ASL classifier constructions relates to ASL proficiency and to nonlinguistic VSPT and MR abilities.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Secora2020VisualSpatialPI,
 author = {Kristen Secora and K. Emmorey},
 booktitle = {Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education},
 journal = {Journal of deaf studies and deaf education},
 title = {Visual-Spatial Perspective-Taking in Spatial Scenes and in American Sign Language.},
 year = {2020}
}
```

## Full Text

# Visual-Spatial Perspective-Taking in Spatial Scenes and in American Sign Language

[Kristen Secora](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Secora%20K%22[Author]) 1, ✉ , [Karen Emmorey](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Emmorey%20K%22[Author]) 2

- Author information
- Article notes
- Copyright and License information

PMCID: PMC7673616  PMID: [32476020](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32476020/)

## Abstract

As spatial languages, sign languages rely on spatial cognitive processes that are not involved for spoken languages. Interlocutors have different visual perspectives of the signer's hands requiring a mental transformation for successful communication about spatial scenes. It is unknown whether visual-spatial perspective-taking (VSPT) or mental rotation (MR) abilities support signers' comprehension of perspective-dependent American Sign Language (ASL) structures. A total of 33 deaf ASL adult signers completed tasks examining nonlinguistic VSPT ability, MR ability, general ASL proficiency (ASL-Sentence Reproduction Task [ASL-SRT]), and an ASL comprehension test involving perspective-dependent classifier constructions (the ASL Spatial Perspective Comprehension Test [ASPCT] test). Scores on the linguistic (ASPCT) and VSPT tasks positively correlated with each other and both correlated with MR ability; however, VSPT abilities predicted linguistic perspective-taking better than did MR ability. ASL-SRT scores correlated with ASPCT accuracy (as both require ASL proficiency) but not with VSPT scores. Therefore, the ability to comprehend perspective-dependent ASL classifier constructions relates to ASL proficiency and to nonlinguistic VSPT and MR abilities.

In the effort to understand what cognitive abilities support typical and atypical language comprehension and production, sign language research can make important contributions to the discussion. Researching language in a modality other than speech helps researchers, clinicians, and teachers to understand the cognitive abilities that support general language comprehension and production (i.e., abilities required for language regardless of modality) and those that are specifically tied to either the spoken or signed modality. Sign languages (such as American Sign Language, ASL) are produced by the hands, face, and body, and utilize the space in front of the body, called signing space. Sign languages can use space topographically to schematically map the spatial arrangements of signs or spatial classifier constructions [1](#fn1) within signing space onto real or imagined spaces and the objects in them. For example, a signer can produce classifier handshapes that refer to a person and a bicycle and place them next to each other in signing space to indicate a person standing next to a bicycle. The classifiers' spatial arrangement maps directly onto the spatial relationship of those two objects in real or imagined space. This iconic use of space stands in contrast to the way spoken languages express spatial relations, namely via specific lexical items (e.g., prepositions) or spatial morphemes (e.g., locative affixes).

While knowing a sign language does not seem to result in a generalized advantage in spatial cognition (e.g., [Marschark et al., 2015](#ref24) ), there is evidence that sign experience can result in specific enhancements in spatial cognition. When adult deaf signers and hearing nonsigners were asked to generate the mental images of block letters, the deaf signers showed significantly faster reaction times than the hearing nonsigners when forming the mental images of complex letters ( [Emmorey &amp; Kosslyn, 1996](#ref13) ; [Emmorey, Kosslyn, &amp; Bellugi, 1993](#ref14) ). Similarly, during a task requiring a decision about whether two rotated block figures were mirror images of one another, deaf signing adults showed faster reaction times compared with hearing nonsigners but both groups were equally accurate ( [Emmorey et al., 1993](#ref14) ). Furthermore, [Emmorey, Klima, and Hickok (1998](#ref12) ) showed that adult deaf signers were better than nonsigners at remembering objects' orientations within a scene and recreating a visual scene (e.g., a room with furniture) but only when a 180° mental transformation of the scene was required. The groups performed similarly when no transformation was required. [Emmorey et al. (1998](#ref12) ) suggest, as with others who report advantages in spatial cognition for deaf signers (e.g., [Bavelier et al., 2001](#ref1) ; [Talbot &amp; Haude, 1993](#ref45) ), that the specific spatial processes involved in sign language processing can provide measurable advantages for similar nonlinguistic tasks. The enhanced performance seen in adult deaf signers for these spatial cognitive tasks suggests that nonlinguistic visual-spatial skills may support performance in spatial linguistic tasks.

Sign researchers have long recognized that the spatial nature of signed languages creates conflicting visual perspectives between the signer and the addressee when conversing in the canonical face-to-face arrangement: what is produced on the signer's right is viewed on the addressee's left (e.g., [Emmorey et al., 1998](#ref12) ; [Emmorey &amp; Tversky, 2002](#ref15) ; [Pyers, Perniss, &amp; Emmorey, 2008](#ref31) ; [Pyers, Perniss, &amp; Emmorey, 2015](#ref32) ). This perspective conflict only arises when signers describe nonpresent scenes. When describing objects that are visible in their environment, the location of the objects and of the signer's hands are both visible, and such spatial descriptions are produced in what has been termed Shared Space ( [Emmorey &amp; Tversky, 2002](#ref15) ). For Shared Space, there is no need for perspective-taking because each interlocutor can maintain his or her perspective of the jointly viewed scene, and this perspective does not conflict with the view of the signer's hands. When describing nonpresent scenes, the signer and addressee view the signer's hands with differing perspectives (e.g., the sign produced on the signer's left is viewed by the addressee to be on the right side). Therefore, some sort of mental process is required in order for both interlocutors to arrive at the same understanding of what is being signed. The convention in ASL (and many other unrelated sign languages) is for the signer to produce egocentric descriptions for nonjointly viewed scenes using what we will term "Signer Space" (i.e., from the signer's perspective), which contrasts with Shared Space ( [Brozdowski, Secora, &amp; Emmorey, 2019](#ref3) ; [Pyers et al., 2008](#ref31) ; [Pyers et al., 2015](#ref32) ). For descriptions in Signer Space, the addressee(s) must perform a mental transformation in order to understand spatial descriptions from the signer's perspective. Although this perspective conflict has been discussed previously, little work has been done to examine the cognitive mechanisms that underlie the resolution of this conflict.

[Emmorey et al. (1998](#ref12) ) discussed the required transformation in terms of mental rotation (MR) of a scene (e.g., of the description of a room). While MR and perspective-taking abilities are highly related, they are dissociable processes ( [Hegarty &amp; Waller, 2004](#ref19) ; [Zacks, Mires, Tversky, &amp; Hazeltine, 2000](#ref49) ). Visual-spatial perspective-taking (VSPT) seems to involve an imagined self-projection through space to align with another's physical location and their visual-spatial perspective of a target object or scene ( [Kessler &amp; Rutherford, 2010](#ref21) ; [Kessler &amp; Thomson, 2010](#ref22) ), which is in contrast to the process of mentally rotating a two- or three-dimensional object or array (e.g., [Michelon &amp; Zacks, 2006](#ref27) ; [Zacks et al., 2000](#ref49) ). While gender effects on object-based MR ability have been well documented (e.g., [Peters, 2005](#ref29) ; [Voyer, Voyer, &amp; Bryden, 1995](#ref48) ), reports are mixed as to the role of gender in VSPT tasks (e.g., [Kessler &amp; Wang, 2012](#ref23) ; [Mohr, Rowe, &amp; Blanke, 2010](#ref28) ; [Zacks et al., 2000](#ref49) ). Although gender is often an important factor in spatial tasks, particularly for MR type tasks, it may play less of a role during the comprehension of spatial language in ASL. [Emmorey et al. (1998](#ref12) ) found that males outperformed females on an object-based spatial task, but male and female signers performed similarly when the task involved comprehending spatial ASL descriptions.

To date, the nature of the spatial transformation necessary for the addressee to adopt the signer's perspective remains unclear. [Pyers et al. (2015](#ref32) ) suggested that embodied or cognitive control mechanisms might underlie the ability for an addressee to ignore his or her own visual perspective of a signed (or gestured) production in order to adopt another's visual perspective. One way to examine what processes contribute to this perspective transformation is to compare an individual's relative abilities in MR and nonlinguistic visual-spatial perspective-taking tasks with their ability to perform the necessary perspective transformation within sign comprehension.

Evidence from atypical sign language development during childhood has provided some clues about whether nonlinguistic VSPT ability may be related to the spatial transformations seen in ASL. [Quinto-Pozos et al. (2013](#ref34) ) presented a case study of a native signing deaf teenager, pseudonym Alice, who achieved high levels of ASL proficiency, but selectively struggled with the aspects of ASL that depended on understanding perspectives (e.g., role/referential shift, classifier constructions). She also struggled with nonlinguistic visuospatial tasks (e.g., assembling puzzles) and with nonlinguistic perspective-taking tasks (e.g., imagining how an array would look from another perspective). Quinto-Pozos et al. hypothesized that Alice had a developmental perspective-taking visuospatial deficit which selectively impaired her ability to master the spatial aspects of ASL that depend on those nonlinguistic abilities.

Similarly, [Shield and Meier (2012](#ref40) ) reported data from native signing children who have been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). These children produced palm reversal errors, a pattern of errors not seen in typically developing native signing children. The children with ASD produced manual fingerspelled [2](#fn2) letters with the palm facing inward, toward their own body, rather than with a correct outward-facing palm. Typically developing children learning ASL do not produce this kind of inward facing error. Such errors seem to reflect a lack of perspective shifting because the children with ASD copy what they visually perceive. For instance, if the child observes a parent fingerspelling with an outward-facing palm orientation (normal fingerspelling) and mimics the observed handshape and orientation, such a production would result in an incorrect inward-facing palm orientation. Shield and Meier suggest that this kind of error may arise from a difficulty with self-other mapping. One part of successful mapping between one's own body and another's body may depend on a VSPT process which seems to be impaired in individuals with ASD (e.g., [Hamilton, Brindley, &amp; Frith, 2009](#ref17) ; [Shield, Pyers, Martin, &amp; Tager-Flusberg, 2016](#ref41) ).

Thus, evidence from atypical sign language acquisition suggests that nonlinguistic perspective-taking abilities may underlie linguistic perspective-taking abilities in ASL, particularly for perspective-dependent structures in ASL. Furthermore, as described above, behavioral studies with adults suggest that extensive practice with a signed language can result in enhancements in nonlinguistic visuospatial abilities. However, whether nonlinguistic perspective-taking abilities relate to linguistic perspective-taking abilities in signing adults remain to be empirically tested. Therefore, the research question for the present study is: what cognitive abilities are related to the ability of adult signers to comprehend perspective-dependent structures in ASL?

MR processes may be involved in reconciling the spatial conflict between the signer's and addressee's perspective (as suggested by [Emmorey et al., 1998](#ref12) ). If so, we would expect to see a significant correlation between an individual's performance on an MR task and performance on an ASL task involving spatial perspective transformation. On the other hand, nonlinguistic perspective-taking abilities may relate to an addressee's ability to adopt the signer's perspective. In this case, we would expect to see a correlation between performance on a nonlinguistic VSPT task and an ASL task requiring perspective-taking. Finally, both MR and nonlinguistic perspective-taking abilities may relate to a signer's ability to reconcile the perspective conflict within ASL due to the highly related nature of MR and embodied perspective-taking (e.g., [Hegarty &amp; Waller, 2004](#ref19) ). In that case, multiple regressions would be able to determine whether one of the two cognitive abilities relates more strongly with ASL perspective-taking performance. Since perspective-taking within ASL also involves the comprehension of linguistic structure (e.g., phonological, lexical, and syntactic processing), we expect general ASL proficiency to relate to the comprehension of perspective-dependent ASL structures. However, we would not expect overall ASL proficiency to relate to nonlinguistic VSPT abilities since only the ability to comprehend and produce specific ASL structures (e.g., classifier constructions) is hypothesized to relate to VSPT abilities. As [Quinto-Pozos et al. (2013](#ref34) ) showed that nonlinguistic VSPT deficits can disrupt the use of perspective-dependent ASL structures in spite of achieving a high proficiency in overall ASL ability.

Therefore, the present study examined the relationship between deaf signers' performance on a nonlinguistic VSPT task, an MR task, and a task that taps proficiency in comprehending specific ASL structures hypothesized to rely on a visual-spatial transformation. [Secora and Emmorey (2019](#ref38) ) previously reported the VSPT and MR performance of this group of deaf signers in comparison to a group of hearing nonsigners-both groups performed similarly on the two tasks. The aim of the present study was to clarify what cognitive abilities play a role in reconciling the visual-perspective conflict that can arise as a result of the topographic use of space in ASL spatial descriptions.

## Method

### Participants

A total of 33 deaf signers (16 F; *M* age = 30.4 years, SD = 8.1; range: 20.4-48.5 years) were recruited from the community in San Diego, CA. Demographic information is presented in [Table 1](#TB1) . Of the 33 total signers, 20 participants were native signers (learned ASL from birth from deaf parent/s; 13F) and 13 were early signers (learned ASL prior to age 6; 3F). Additionally, participants reported no history of ASD. ASD screening information was unavailable from one male participant. Participants also reported no history of significant neurological problems, such as head injuries, epilepsy, coma, etc. There were no significant differences in age between males and females or between native and early signers (all *p* s &gt; .20).

#### Table 1.

Mean demographic information (SD)

|                            | Age        | KBIT-2 (raw score)   | Years of education   |
|----------------------------|------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| Total                      | 30.4 (8.1) | 40.6 (3.3)           | 16.7 (3.1)           |
| Males ( *n* = 17)          | 30.4 (8.3) | 41.6 (2.3)           | 17.1 (3.1)           |
| Females ( *n* = 16)        | 30.3 (8.2) | 39.3 (3.8)           | 16.2 (3.0)           |
| Native signers ( *n* = 20) | 29.0 (7.2) | 40.7 (2.9)           | 16.7 (2.7)           |
| Early signers ( *n* = 13)  | 32.6 (9.3) | 40.4 (3.9)           | 16.8 (3.7)           |

[Open in a new tab](table/TB1)

Note: *Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition* (KBIT-2).

Nine additional participants were run on the experiments but were excluded from the analyses due to a systematic selection of the incorrect answer on the ASPCT test (task described below). They selected the correct answer at a rate that was significantly below chance and they selected the 180° foil answer significantly higher than chance. We interpreted this pattern of responses as indicating that the participants had a different understanding of the task and/or instructions.

Nonverbal reasoning was measured by the matrices subtest of the *Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition* (KBIT-2, [Kaufman &amp; Kaufman, 2004](#ref20) ). Raw KBIT-2 scores are presented in [Table 1](#TB1) (maximum possible correct = 46). KBIT-2 scores for the male participants were marginally higher than for the female participants, *t* (30) = 2.00, *p* = .054. One female participant did not take the KBIT-2 due to familiarity with the test. There were no significant differences in years of education between males and females or between native and early signers (all *p* s &gt; .30).

Participants' self-report of race consisted of Caucasian ( *N* = 26), Black/African American ( *N* = 2), Asian ( *N* = 1), more than one race ( *N* = 3), and unknown ( *N* = 1). Five participants reported Latino/Hispanic ethnicity, 27 reported Not Latino/Hispanic ethnicity, and one reported unknown ethnicity.

### Materials and Procedure Nonlinguistic tasks

#### VSPT: three buildings task

This three-dimensional nonlinguistic VSPT task was based on the task used by [Clements-Stephens, Vasiljevic, Murray, and Shelton (2013](#ref4) ) and [Shelton, Clements-Stephens, Lam, Pak, and Murray (2012](#ref39) ). Participants viewed two different displays each containing three unique buildings and made decisions about which view of the buildings was represented by a photograph. The buildings were placed on a 24-inch-diameter wooden disk that was covered in a faux grass mat (see [Figure 1](#f1) ). Around the edges of the disk were placed seven, uniquely-colored perspective-taking targets, at 45° intervals with the participant seated at the 0° heading. A laptop computer showed participants photographs of the display which were taken from the perspectives corresponding to the targets. The participant's task was to decide for each photograph, "which triangle is at this view?" Participants responded by pressing the key on the keyboard that corresponded to the location/color of the perspective target. The "v" key was labeled with a sticker corresponding to the color of the perspective target 45° to the participant's left. The "f" key corresponded with the target 90° to the participant's left. Other response keys followed the same key/perspective target pairing: "t" = 135° target, "y" = 180° target, "u" = 225° target, "j" = 270° target, "n" = 315° target, and "b" corresponded with the participant's view of the displays (labeled with a black sticker and no perspective target). The colors of the perspective-taking targets were randomly assigned for each participant and remained fixed for that participant throughout the experiment. Reaction times and key responses were collected. Trials timed out after 7 s if no response had been made.

Example of experimental setup for the VSPT task.

<!-- image -->

Perspective targets consisted of a colored wooden triangle (and cube) affixed to the top of a wooden candlestick holder. Participants completed two conditions, a nonsocial (triangles without eyes) and a social condition (triangles with eyes). Previous research indicated that this social context manipulation impacted whether hearing participants adopted a social or a nonsocial (e.g., visual) strategy during the VSPT task ( [Clements-Stephens et al., 2013](#ref4) ; [Shelton et al., 2012](#ref39) ). However, [Secora and Emmorey (2019](#ref38) ) found that deaf participants utilized the same strategy regardless of the social or nonsocial context. Therefore, these conditions were collapsed for the analyses in the current study.

Instructions were presented in written English and in ASL via a prerecorded video featuring a native signer. Prior to beginning the practice trials, participants walked around the building display to familiarize themselves with the views from all perspectives. Participants viewed 160 trials presented in a pseudorandomized fixed order. Half of the trials were presented in each of the nonsocial or social conditions, and half with each building display. Conditions and building displays were randomly selected for each person with the exception that each person saw the buildings in a fixed order (i.e., the same building display was presented first in each condition).

#### Revised Mental Rotation test (MRT)

For this test, participants were shown black-and-white line drawings of three-dimensional blocks on paper ( [Peters et al., 1995](#ref30) ; [Vandenberg &amp; Kuse, 1978](#ref47) ). Participants' task was to decide which two of four possible response figures matched a target figure. Each response figure was rotated so that a slightly different angle/face of the figure was visible. Participants read the instructions in written English, and instructions were also given by a fluent signer in ASL. They completed three practice items with feedback and then 12 items in each of two 4-min blocks. Items were only scored correct if both target responses were correctly identified. The dependent variable was the number of problems correctly answered (total possible = 24).

### Sign Language Tasks

#### ASL Spatial Perspective Comprehension Test

This computerized task (described in detail in [Brozdowski et al., 2019](#ref3) ) is an adaptation of the ASL Perspective Taking Comprehension Test developed by Quinto-Pozos and colleagues ( [Quinto-Pozos et al., 2013](#ref34) ; [Quinto-Pozos &amp; Hou, 2013](#ref33) ). Participants viewed a video of a signer producing two one-handed ASL classifier constructions referring to the location of two different toys (see [Figure 2](#f2) ) either facing the camera or at a 90° angle to the camera. Participants selected which of four possible response pictures corresponded to the signed description by pressing a key labeled with a letter on a sticker (A = "f" key, B = "g" key, C = "h" key, and D = "j" key).

Sample signer space stimulus item with the correct response picture and foils.

<!-- image -->

Trials timed out after 7 s if no response was made. The toy objects (a dog, a man, or a truck) were arranged side-by-side with either a left-right or front-back arrangement relative to the signer, and each could be rotated in a variety of directions (i.e., on its left/right side, front/back side, or upright/upside down).

Participants completed 18 experimental trials in each of four blocks, preceded by two practice trials (with feedback) per block. Blocks consisted of two "angle" conditions (face-to-face or 90°, sideways to the camera) nested within two "space" conditions (Shared Space or Signer Space). Differences in the instruction video/demonstration as well as the sign model's shirt color/style were cues as to whether the production should be interpreted as Shared Space or Signer Space; additionally, the back of a laptop screen was visible in each trial in Signer Space as an indicator that the picture was visible only to her (see [Brozdowski et al., 2019](#ref3) , for further details). To succeed on the Shared Space items, participants did not need to perform a perspective transformation but rather directly mapped the signer's hands to the objects' positions in the pictures. Because the Signer Space items required adopting the signer's perspective in order to succeed, this is the condition of interest for the present analysis. Therefore, the correlation analyses were only conducted with data from the Signer Space condition (both the face-to-face and 90° angle items).

There were three types of foils (see [Figure 2](#f2) ). In the object rotation foil, one of the two objects was rotated 180° on one of its intrinsic axes. In the 180° foil, the correct object arrangement was pictured from the opposite, 180° perspective. In the face-to-face condition, the 180° foil represented the opposite space (e.g., adopting Shared Space when the correct response required adopting the model's perspective in Signer Space). In the arrangement swap foil, the two objects are displayed with the correct orientation relative to the viewer but in the opposite side of space relative to each other.

#### ASL-Sentence Reproduction Task

The ASL-Sentence Reproduction Task (ASL-SRT) is a measure of ASL proficiency involving both ASL comprehension and production abilities ( [Hauser, Paludneviciene, Supalla, &amp; Bavelier, 2006](#ref18) ; [Supalla, Hauser, &amp; Bavelier, 2014](#ref44) ). This test has been shown to differentiate between native signers and those who learned sign late, deaf native signers and hearing native signers, as well as deaf native signing children versus deaf native signing adults ( [Hauser et al., 2006](#ref18) ; [Supalla et al., 2014](#ref44) ).

For this test, participants viewed prerecorded videos of a woman signing a sentence and were asked to reproduce the sentence exactly as it was signed, including identical morphosyntactic inflection, word order, and lexical items. Participants' signed responses were video recorded for subsequent offline scoring. Following three practice items, participants viewed the first 35-items from the original 40-sentence test reported by [Hauser et al. (2006](#ref18) ). The last five items were very long and complex, and previous testing indicated that participants rarely got those items correct. Therefore, they were not administered for this assessment. Additionally, the subset of 20 sentences reported by [Supalla et al. (2014](#ref44) ) was all included in the 35-item subset used here. No corrective feedback was provided for the practice items; rather, if participants made mistakes, they were simply reminded to reproduce the sentences exactly as the model had signed them. Participants were only allowed to view each sentence one time but were allowed unlimited time to respond. Sentences were ordered by increasing length and complexity. Only items that were reproduced identically (e.g., no added/deleted/changed signs, no modifications in sign order, etc.) were marked as correct. A native deaf signer scored all productions for accuracy. Due to a technical malfunction, several items for three participants were unable to be scored resulting in 28, 30, and 32 total items for these participants. Percent accuracy was calculated for each person out of the total scored items (prorated for the three participants who were missing items).

Additionally, while not classified as errors, for some items, participants could produce mirrored productions (i.e., productions on the signer's left side are produced on the participant's right side) or reversed productions (e.g., productions on the signer's left side are also produced on the participant's left side). Since these types of productions are informative for an analysis of perspective-taking, the number of mirrored and reversed productions was also scored for each participant. A total of 14 test items allowed for possible mirrored or reversed productions. [3](#fn3)

## Results

As noted above, accuracy and response time (RT) averages for the ASPCT task were limited to the perspective-dependent Signer Space items because these items were of the most theoretical interest with regard to perspective-taking. Similarly, the VSPT analyses were limited to items requiring a perspective shift (e.g., excluding items that corresponded to the participant's own self view). RT analyses included only correct responses, and responses for which participants timed out were included in the accuracy analysis as errors. Means and SDs for the spatial and linguistic tasks are presented in [Table 2](#TB2) . Two-tailed *t* -tests (planned comparisons) were conducted between groups (significance indicated by asterisks in [Table 2](#TB2) ).

### Table 2.

Means and SDs for spatial and ASL tasks divided by gender and sign exposure groups

|                      | Females               | Males                | Early               | Native               |
|----------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|---------------------|----------------------|
| ASL-SRT (%)          | 67 (14)               | 69 (7)               | 64 (9) [*](#tblfn1) | 71 (12) [*](#tblfn1) |
| ASPCT accuracy (%)   | 68 (16)               | 74 (13)              | 69 (15)             | 73 (15)              |
| ASPCT RT (ms)        | 3,823 (696)           | 4,052 (619)          | 3,793 (466)         | 3,742 (505)          |
| MRT (number correct) | 12 (6) [*](#tblfn1)   | 16 (5) [*](#tblfn1)  | 15 (6)              | 14 (6)               |
| VSPT accuracy (%)    | 69 (12) [**](#tblfn2) | 86 (7) [**](#tblfn2) | 80 (13)             | 76 (12)              |
| VSPT RT (ms)         | 3,725 (685)           | 3,597 (536)          | 3,665 (611)         | 3,655 (619)          |

[Open in a new tab](table/TB2)

*** *p* &lt; .05.

**** *p* &lt; .001.

Note: ASPCT = ASL Spatial Perspective Comprehension Test; VSPT = visual-spatial perspective-taking; ASL-SRT = ASL Sentence Reproduction Test; MRT = mental rotation test.

Males had significantly higher accuracy than females on the spatial tasks (VSPT and mental rotation test [MRT]), but there were no gender differences on the ASL language tasks. Native signers were significantly more accurate than early signers on the ASL-SRT, but there were no group differences on the spatial tasks or the classifier comprehension task (ASPCT).

Visual examination of scatterplots between all pairings of dependent variables revealed no significant outliers. Box's test was nonsignificant for all MANOVA tests for RT and accuracy ( *p* &gt; .5) indicating homogeneity in the covariance matrices. Shapiro-Wilk tests of normality revealed that each variable used in the subsequent analyses did not deviate significantly from normal ( *p* s &gt; .05; VSPT RT, ASPCT RT, ASPCT accuracy, MRT accuracy, and ASL-SRT accuracy) except VSPT accuracy which did significantly differ from normal ( *p* = .007). Therefore, the VSPT accuracy data were transformed using an arcsine transformation (Shapiro-Wilk *p* &gt; .05). All analyses that include VSPT accuracy were done using the transformed data.

Separate MANOVAs for RT and accuracy were conducted for the dependent variables for the tests (ASPCT, MRT, and VSPT) with sign exposure group as a between-subjects factor. There were no differences between early and native signers for RT or accuracy ( *p* s &gt; .50).

Therefore, aside from native signers being more accurate than early signers on the ASL-SRT, there were no differences in performance on the ASPCT or spatial tasks. [Emmorey et al. (1993](#ref14) ) similarly found no difference in performance between native signers and early signers on spatial tasks (i.e., MR and image generation). Therefore, we collapsed these groups to increase power in subsequent correlation analyses.

In order to examine the effects of gender on the VSPT, MRT, and ASPCT tasks, separate MANOVAs were performed for accuracy and RT with gender as a between-subjects variable.

Because MRT is a measure of accuracy (i.e., number correct), MRT was only included in the MANOVA for accuracy. For accuracy, using Pillai's trace, there was a significant effect of gender on performance on the perspective-taking tasks, *V* = .464, *F* (3, 29) = 8.62, *p* &lt; .001, =.464. Follow-up individual ANOVAs for each dependent variable revealed that males were significantly more accurate than females on the VSPT task, *F* (1, 32) = 25.0, *p* &lt; .001, = .447, and the MRT task, *F* (1, 32) = 4.24, *p* = .048, = .120, but not on the ASPCT task, *F* (1, 32) = 1.80, *p* = .189. For RT, the MANOVA revealed that there was no effect of gender for either the VSPT RT or ASPCT RT, *F* (2, 30) = 1.08, *p* = .352.

Inline graphic

<!-- image -->

Inline graphic

<!-- image -->

Inline graphic

<!-- image -->

Since the main question of interest concerned the relationship between an individual's linguistic and nonlinguistic perspective-taking abilities, Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated for accuracy and RT for the VSPT, MRT, and ASPCT tasks (see [Table 3](#TB3) ). VSPT accuracy and ASPCT accuracy were significantly related, as were VSPT RT and ASPCT RT. Accuracy on the MR task correlated with both linguistic perspective-taking skill (ASPCT accuracy and RT) and nonlinguistic perspective-taking skill (VSPT accuracy and RT). ASL-SRT accuracy was positively correlated with ASPCT accuracy: individuals with better ASL proficiency also tended to comprehend the perspective-dependent ASL structures better.

### Table 3.

Correlation coefficients for linguistic and nonlinguistic spatial and perspective-taking tasks

|                       | 1       | 2       | 3      | 4      | 5     | 6   |
|-----------------------|---------|---------|--------|--------|-------|-----|
| 1. VSPT accuracy      |         |         |        |        |       |     |
| 2. VSPT RT            | −.51 ** |         |        |        |       |     |
| 3. ASPCT accuracy     | .49 **  | −.39 *  |        |        |       |     |
| 4. ASPCT RT           | −.10    | .38 *   | −.28   |        |       |     |
| 5. ASL-SRT accuracy   | .27     | −.26    | .50 ** | −.05   |       |     |
| 6. MRT number correct | .64 **  | −.45 ** | .45 ** | −.36 * | .38 * |     |

[Open in a new tab](table/TB3)

* *p* &lt; .05, ** *p* &lt; .01

Note: ASPCT = ASL Spatial Perspective Comprehension Test; VSPT = visual-spatial perspective-taking; ASL-SRT = ASL Sentence Reproduction Test; MRT = mental rotation test.

Separate backward linear regression models for ASPCT RT and accuracy were conducted to examine the relative strength of VSPT and MRT performance as predictors ( [Table 4](#TB4) ). The Durbin-Watson test was nonsignificant ( *p* = 1.69) indicating that there was no autocorrelation among the residuals. Since ASL-SRT accuracy correlated with ASPCT accuracy, it was also included in the accuracy regression model. MRT was excluded from both RT and accuracy models for explaining a nonsignificant amount of variance, leaving VSPT RT and accuracy as the better predictor. When both predictors were included in the model, neither significantly predicted a unique amount of the variance in ASPCT. For the accuracy model, VSPT accuracy explained a significant amount of the variance even when ASL-SRT accuracy was included in the model, indicating that nonlinguistic VSPT abilities are involved in linguistic perspective-taking (ASPCT accuracy) beyond general linguistic processing.

### Table 4.

ASPCT accuracy and RT backwards linear regression model comparisons

|                      | Unstandardized Coefficients   | Unstandardized Coefficients   | Standardized Coefficients   |       |                   | Collinearity Statistics   | Collinearity Statistics   |
|----------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------|-------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
|                      | *β*                           | SE                            | *β*                         | *t*   | *p*               | tolerance                 | VIF                       |
| **Accuracy model 1** |                               |                               |                             |       |                   |                           |                           |
| Constant             | .011                          | .196                          |                             | .057  | .955              |                           |                           |
| ASL-SRT accuracy     | .493                          | .206                          | .375                        | 2.39  | .023 [*](#tblfn3) | .856                      | 1.17                      |
| VSPT accuracy        | .299                          | .176                          | .320                        | 1.70  | .100              | .596                      | 1.68                      |
| MRT number correct   | .003                          | .005                          | .104                        | .530  | .600              | .551                      | 1.81                      |
| **Accuracy model 2** |                               |                               |                             |       |                   |                           |                           |
| Constant             | −.034                         | .175                          |                             | −.195 | .845              |                           |                           |
| ASL-SRT accuracy     | .524                          | .196                          | .398                        | 2.68  | .012 [*](#tblfn3) | .927                      | 1.08                      |
| VSPT accuracy        | .354                          | .139                          | .379                        | 2.55  | .016 [*](#tblfn3) | .927                      | 1.08                      |
| **RT Model 1**       |                               |                               |                             |       |                   |                           |                           |
| Constant             | 3,235                         | 908                           |                             | 3.57  | .001 [*](#tblfn3) |                           |                           |
| VSPT RT              | .295                          | .200                          | .272                        | 1.48  | .150              | .794                      | 1.26                      |
| MRT number correct   | −26.7                         | 20.7                          | −.238                       | −1.29 | .206              | .794                      | 1.26                      |
| **RT Model 2**       |                               |                               |                             |       |                   |                           |                           |
| Constant             | 2,432                         | 668                           |                             | 3.64  | .001 [*](#tblfn3) |                           |                           |
| VSPT RT              | .412                          | .180                          | .380                        | 2.29  | .029 [*](#tblfn3) | 1.00                      | 1.00                      |

[Open in a new tab](table/TB4)

* *p* &lt; .05.

Note: VSPT = visual-spatial perspective-taking; MRT = mental rotation test.

We additionally examined whether there was a relationship between performance on the nonlinguistic perspective-taking tasks and perspective-dependent responses on the ASPCT and ASL-SRT assessments. In the ASPCT test, selection of the 180° response foil for the Signer Space condition indicated failure to adopt the signer's perspective. In the ASL-SRT, the number of mirrored productions also indicated failure to adopt the signer's perspective (although items were not marked incorrect for if they were produced from a mirrored perspective), while reversed productions indicated that the participant had adopted signer's perspective. Correlations are presented in [Table 5](#TB5) .

### Table 5.

Correlation coefficients for perspective-dependent responses on spatial and perspective-taking tasks

|                                    | 1                  | 2                   | 3                  | 4                   | 5    | 6                  | 7   |
|------------------------------------|--------------------|---------------------|--------------------|---------------------|------|--------------------|-----|
| 1. VSPT accuracy                   |                    |                     |                    |                     |      |                    |     |
| 2. ASPCT accuracy                  | .49 [**](#tblfn5)  |                     |                    |                     |      |                    |     |
| 3. ASL-SRT accuracy                | .27                | .50 [**](#tblfn5)   |                    |                     |      |                    |     |
| 4. Number mirrored items           | −.20               | −.33                | −.004              |                     |      |                    |     |
| 5. Number reversed items (ASL-SRT) | .27                | .40 [*](#tblfn4)    | .23                | −.92 [***](#tblfn6) |      |                    |     |
| 6. Number ASPCT 180° errors        | −.48 [**](#tblfn5) | −.75 [***](#tblfn6) | −.50 [**](#tblfn5) | .15                 | −.22 |                    |     |
| 7. MRT number correct              | .64 [***](#tblfn6) | .45 [**](#tblfn5)   | .38 [*](#tblfn4)   | .08                 | .02  | −.45 [**](#tblfn5) |     |

[Open in a new tab](table/TB5)

* *p* &lt; .05.

** *p* &lt; .01.

*** *p* &lt; .001.

Note: ASPCT = ASL Spatial Perspective Comprehension Test; VSPT = visual-spatial perspective-taking; MRT = mental rotation test; ASL-SRT = ASL-Sentence Reproduction Test.

With respect to VSPT accuracy, the number of times individuals selected the ASPCT 180° foil (Signer Space) was significantly related to their accuracy on the nonlinguistic perspective-taking VSPT task. Participants with fewer 180° ASPCT errors tended to achieve higher VSPT accuracy. The number of reversed items from the ASL-SRT assessment (indicating that the producer had adopted the signer's perspective) significantly correlated with accuracy on the ASPCT assessment-individuals who were more likely to adopt the signer's perspective in the ASL-SRT were also better at adopting the signer's perspective in the ASPCT assessment.

Similarly, the number of 180° ASPCT errors significantly correlated with accuracy on the ASL-SRT assessment-individuals who made more 180° errors on the linguistic perspective-taking task (ASPCT) achieved lower accuracies on the ASL proficiency measure (ASL-SRT).

In order to better understand what underlying cognitive abilities best explain the variance in perspective-dependent errors within the ASPCT assessment (i.e., 180° errors), a backwards linear regression was run including ASL-SRT accuracy (i.e., general ASL proficiency), VSPT accuracy (nonlinguistic perspective-taking ability), and MR ability (see [Table 6](#TB6) ).

### Table 6.

Linear regression for ASPCT 180° perspective errors

|                       | Unstandardized Coefficients   | Unstandardized Coefficients   | Standardized Coefficients   |       |        | Collinearity Statistics   | Collinearity Statistics   |
|-----------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------|--------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| Predictors            | β                             | SE                            | β                           | *t*   | *p*    | Tolerance                 | VIF                       |
| Constant              | 22.2                          | 4.26                          |                             | 5.22  | <.001  |                           |                           |
| ASL-SRT accuracy      | −12.8                         | 4.77                          | −.400                       | −2.68 | .012 * | .927                      | 1.079                     |
| VSPT average accuracy | −8.46                         | 3.39                          | −.373                       | −2.50 | .018 * | .927                      | 1.079                     |

[Open in a new tab](table/TB6)

ASL-SRT and VSPT accuracies explained a significant amount of the variance in linguistic perspective errors; however, MR accuracy did not ( *t* = −0.604, *p* = .551).

## Discussion

The present study examined the relationship between deaf signers' performance on an ASL linguistic VSPT comprehension task (ASPCT), a nonlinguistic VSPT task, an MR task, and an ASL proficiency test (ASL-SRT). We found a significant correlation between nonlinguistic VSPT performance and linguistic perspective-taking performance in both RT and accuracy for adult deaf signers. This finding suggests that similar underlying cognitive abilities support perspective-taking within linguistic and nonlinguistic domains for signing adults with no reported history of significant neurological problems or ASD, similar to what has been suggested by [Quinto-Pozos et al. (2013](#ref34) ) during sign language development. Quinto-Pozos et al. hypothesized that a specific VSPT deficit might interfere with the acquisition of ASL structures that depend on perspective-taking to comprehend and produce (i.e., spatial classifier constructions). Our findings support this hypothesis by demonstrating a significant relationship between nonlinguistic and linguistic perspective-taking ability for adult signers.

Additionally, MR ability was significantly related to both ASPCT and VSPT performance, suggesting that MR skills also support perspective-taking in both linguistic and nonlinguistic domains. Therefore, MR and nonlinguistic perspective-taking abilities both seem to play a role in the ability to adopt the signer's perspective. However, evidence from the backward linear regression analyses suggested that VSPT performance (both accuracy and RT) predicts ASPCT performance better than MR abilities. These findings are consistent with recent findings from native deaf signing children who have ASD ( [Shield et al., 2016](#ref41) ). Shield et al. found that linguistic and nonlinguistic abilities were impaired for the signing children with ASD but MR abilities were intact. Thus, for typical adult signers and atypical signing children with ASD, MR ability seems to be less related than VSPT ability for the comprehension of ASL perspective-dependent structures.

ASL proficiency (ASL-SRT accuracy) was significantly related to ASPCT accuracy (and not VSPT accuracy), suggesting that an additional language component is also required for success on the ASPCT assessment. This result is not surprising given that ASPCT is a language task.

Results from the correlational and regression analyses suggest that the ability to adopt the signer's perspective in order to comprehend perspective-dependent sign structures (e.g., spatial classifier descriptions) seems to involve: overall ASL abilities, nonlinguistic perspective-taking abilities, and to a lesser extent nonlinguistic MR ability.

Evidence from analyzing the pattern of Mirror/Reversed items from the ASL-SRT suggests that individuals who tend to reverse productions (i.e., adopt the signer's perspective, which is consistent with the ASL convention for interpreting Signer Space) also tend to be better at adopting the signer's perspective when comprehending ASL spatial descriptions using classifiers. Similarly, individuals who were more likely to make perspective-dependent errors when comprehending ASL classifier constructions were also more likely to make errors on the nonlinguistic perspective-taking task and the ASL-SRT proficiency assessment. The linear regression analysis results indicated that nonlinguistic perspective-taking ability and overall ASL proficiency (but not MR ability) significantly explained the variance in a number of perspective-dependent errors during the ASPCT task. Therefore, comprehending perspective-dependent constructions within ASL seems to involve both nonlinguistic perspective-taking ability (as measured by the VSPT task) and overall ASL ability (as measured by the ASL-SRT task).

Furthermore, evidence from the developmental literature suggests that the ability for hearing nonsigning children to perform VSPT tasks is mastered chronologically before ASL-signing children have achieved mastery of spatial classifier constructions (e.g., VSPT: [Flavell, Everett, Croft, &amp; Flavell, 1981](#ref16) ; [Masangkay et al., 1974](#ref26) ; ASL classifiers: [Schick, 1990](#ref36) ; [Slobin et al., 2003](#ref42) ). For hearing children [Masangkay et al. (1974](#ref26) ) suggested that simple visual perspective-taking abilities (e.g., knowing whether or not another person can see an object; also called Level 1 VSPT) are mastered by 3-3.5 years of age, while the more complicated process of knowing how a scene appears differently from different vantage points is mastered by 5 years of age (Level 2 VSPT). Although VSPT development has not been explicitly described for deaf signing children, there is no evidence to suggest they would have a different developmental trajectory than hearing speaking children on this nonlinguistic, spatial ability. With respect to the timeline for acquiring classifier constructions, deaf signing children do not produce classifiers depicting location (including viewpoint-dependent types of classifier constructions) with greater than 70% accuracy until 7-8 years old ( [Schick, 1990](#ref36) ). Similarly, [Martin and Sera (2006](#ref25) ) found that signing children develop the ability to comprehend perspective-dependent structures after structures that do not require MR or perspective shifts. Therefore, deaf signing children do not appear to acquire location classifiers (which would include productions that are dependent on perspective) until well after they would be expected to have acquired Level 2 VSPT abilities based on evidence from hearing nonsigning children.

In spoken language, visual perspective-taking conflicts are largely constrained to directions or locations (e.g., "my left" versus "your left"; "to the left of the building" from my perspective or your perspective). In sign language, however, there are additional perspective-taking situations that arise due to the modality of the language, such as pronominal reference and verb agreement using space (particularly with left-right placement and movements). Therefore, signers have to consider the visual perspectives of their interlocutors frequently and are likely to benefit from the additional practice, as found with other specific spatial abilities (e.g., [Bellugi et al., 1990](#ref2) ; [Emmorey et al., 1993](#ref14) ; [Emmorey &amp; Kosslyn, 1996](#ref13) ). Examining visual perspective-taking abilities with sign language learners longitudinally would help to establish whether learning a signed language leads to measurable improvements in VSPT abilities (either in the speed or accuracy of adopting others' visual perspectives). If experience with sign language improves nonlinguistic perspective-taking abilities, such a finding would be important for individuals who have perspective-taking difficulties as a possible means of improvement.

Alternatively, educators might be able to make use of the perspective-taking demands in language in order to illustrate different cognitive or social perspectives held across communities or individuals.

## Limitations and Future Directions

One limitation of the current study is the lack of variety in the participant population. Our sample consisted of well-educated adults with fairly high verbal abilities (as measured by the ASL-SRT and ASPCT tasks) as well as nonverbal reasoning. Additional research including a more diverse participant sample in terms of nonverbal reasoning and language abilities, including hearing second language learners and deaf signers who acquired ASL after age 6, would provide more generalizable findings about the relationship between nonlanguage VSPT abilities and the use of spatial classifier constructions.

Additionally, further research is necessary in order to determine whether different cognitive abilities (e.g., inhibitory control) might also be involved in comprehension and/or production of perspective-dependent descriptions. For example, [Pyers et al. (2015](#ref32) ) suggested that because sign languages describe spatial relationships linguistically using space, inhibition of one's own visual perspective may be required in order to adopt a conflicting visual perspective (for comprehension or production). Supporting this hypothesis, [Secora (2016](#ref37) ) found that sign-naïve participants' inhibitory control abilities correlated with their ability to comprehend sign-like gestures from a nonegocentric perspective (i.e., the gesturer's perspective). This finding suggests that cognitive control may be needed to inhibit one's own visual perspective in order to adopt that of the gesturer (and possibly the signer).

## Conclusion

Language expressed in the visuospatial modality adds a layer of complexity not found in spoken languages arising from conflicting visual perspectives of the signer's articulators. Results from the present study suggest that nonlinguistic VSPT abilities support the ability to comprehend perspective-dependent spatial descriptions. The examination of modality effects in signed languages helps to illuminate the relationship between language and spatial cognition and contributes to the broader understanding of these two fundamental human cognitive abilities.

## Funding

A grant from the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communicative Disorders (NIDCD) (R01 DC010997) awarded to Karen Emmorey and San Diego State University.

## Acknowledgments

We thank the members of the Laboratory for Language and Cognitive Neuroscience at SDSU for their help with the study and all of the participants who made this research possible. This manuscript is based on data presented in the doctoral dissertation of Kristen Secora.

## Footnotes

Classifier constructions ( [Supalla, 1986](#ref43) ; also called polycomponential verbs, e.g., [Schembri, 2003](#ref35) ; and depicting verbs, e.g., [Valli, Lucas, Mulrooney, &amp; Villanueva, 2011](#ref46) ) in sign languages are predicates that express motion, position, stative-description, and handling information. Different classifier handshapes combine with movements in a constrained manner to express meaning. For instance, a specific handshape representing a vehicle can move through space to show the movement of that vehicle (see papers in [Emmorey, 2003](#ref9) ). For this study, discussion will be limited to spatial classifier types (rather than stative-description or handling type classifier constructions).

In ASL (and other sign languages), a system of handshapes maps to the written system of the surrounding spoken language (i.e., English for ASL) allowing for manual spelling of words letter by letter.

3

Items from the ASL-SRT that weremore likely to be produced from a mirrored perspective included: singular pronouns, signing BRING to indicate bringing people to a hospital, and describing the location of two neighboring buildings. Items that were more likely to be produced from the signer's perspective include plural pronouns and the sign "that" when produced with an object rather than a person (e.g., THAT BIKE, THAT TREE).

## References

1. Bavelier D., Brozinsky C., Tomann A., Mitchell T., Neville H., &amp; Liu G. (2001). Impact of early deafness and early exposure to sign language on the cerebral organization for motion processing. The Journal of Neuroscience, 21(22), 8931-8942. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.21-22-08931.2001 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.21-22-08931.2001) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6762265) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11698604/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Journal%20of%20Neuroscience&title=Impact%20of%20early%20deafness%20and%20early%20exposure%20to%20sign%20language%20on%20the%20cerebral%20organization%20for%20motion%20processing&author=D.%20Bavelier&author=C.%20Brozinsky&author=A.%20Tomann&author=T.%20Mitchell&author=H.%20Neville&volume=21&issue=22&publication_year=2001&pages=8931-8942&pmid=11698604&doi=10.1523/jneurosci.21-22-08931.2001&) ]
2. Bellugi U., O'Grady L., Lillo-Martin D., Hynes M. G., Hoek K., &amp; Corina D. (1990). Enhancement of spatial cognition in deaf children In Volterra V. (Ed.), From Gesture to Language in Hearing and Deaf Children (pp. 278-298). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=From%20Gesture%20to%20Language%20in%20Hearing%20and%20Deaf%20Children&author=U.%20Bellugi&author=L.%20O%E2%80%99Grady&author=D.%20Lillo-Martin&author=M.%20G.%20Hynes&author=K.%20Hoek&publication_year=1990&) ]
3. Brozdowski C., Secora K., &amp; Emmorey K. (2019). Assessing the comprehension of spatial perspectives in ASL classifier constructions. The Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 24(3), 214-222. doi: 10.1093/deafed/enz005 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/deafed/enz005) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6546157) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30856254/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Journal%20of%20Deaf%20Studies%20and%20Deaf%20Education&title=Assessing%20the%20comprehension%20of%20spatial%20perspectives%20in%20ASL%20classifier%20constructions&author=C.%20Brozdowski&author=K.%20Secora&author=K.%20Emmorey&volume=24&issue=3&publication_year=2019&pages=214-222&pmid=30856254&doi=10.1093/deafed/enz005&) ]
4. Clements-Stephens A. M., Vasiljevic K., Murray A. J., &amp; Shelton A. L. (2013). The role of potential agents in making spatial perspective taking social. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 1-11. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00497 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00497) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3763481) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24046735/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Frontiers%20in%20Human%20Neuroscience&title=The%20role%20of%20potential%20agents%20in%20making%20spatial%20perspective%20taking%20social&author=A.%20M.%20Clements-Stephens&author=K.%20Vasiljevic&author=A.%20J.%20Murray&author=A.%20L.%20Shelton&volume=7&publication_year=2013&pages=1-11&pmid=24046735&doi=10.3389/fnhum.2013.00497&) ]
5. Emmorey K. (Ed.). (2003). Perspectives on classifier constructions in sign language. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. doi: 10.4324/9781410607447 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410607447) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Perspectives%20on%20classifier%20constructions%20in%20sign%20language&publication_year=2003&) ]
6. Emmorey K., Damasio H., McCullough S., Grabowski T., Ponto L. L., Hichwa R. D., &amp; Bellugi U. (2002). Neural systems underlying spatial language in American Sign Language. Neuroimage, 17(2), 812-824. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1187 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2002.1187) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12377156/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Neuroimage&title=Neural%20systems%20underlying%20spatial%20language%20in%20American%20Sign%20Language&author=K.%20Emmorey&author=H.%20Damasio&author=S.%20McCullough&author=T.%20Grabowski&author=L.%20L.%20Ponto&volume=17&issue=2&publication_year=2002&pages=812-824&pmid=12377156&doi=10.1006/nimg.2002.1187&) ]
7. Emmorey K., Klima E., &amp; Hickok G. (1998). Mental rotation within linguistic and non- linguistic domains in users of American Sign Language. Cognition, 68(3), 221-246. doi: 10.1016/s0010-0277(98)00054-7 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-0277(98)00054-7) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9852666/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cognition&title=Mental%20rotation%20within%20linguistic%20and%20non-%20linguistic%20domains%20in%20users%20of%20American%20Sign%20Language&author=K.%20Emmorey&author=E.%20Klima&author=G.%20Hickok&volume=68&issue=3&publication_year=1998&pages=221-246&pmid=9852666&doi=10.1016/s0010-0277(98)00054-7&) ]
8. Emmorey K., &amp; Kosslyn S. M. (1996). Enhanced image generation abilities in deaf signers: A right hemisphere effect. Brain and Cognition, 32(1), 28-44. doi: 10.1006/brcg.1996.0056 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/brcg.1996.0056) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8899213/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Brain%20and%20Cognition&title=Enhanced%20image%20generation%20abilities%20in%20deaf%20signers:%20A%20right%20hemisphere%20effect&author=K.%20Emmorey&author=S.%20M.%20Kosslyn&volume=32&issue=1&publication_year=1996&pages=28-44&pmid=8899213&doi=10.1006/brcg.1996.0056&) ]
9. Emmorey K., Kosslyn S. M., &amp; Bellugi U. (1993). Visual imagery and visual-spatial language: Enhanced imagery abilities in deaf and hearing ASL signers. Cognition, 46(2), 139-181. doi: 10.1016/0010-0277(93)90017-p [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(93)90017-p) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8432094/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cognition&title=Visual%20imagery%20and%20visual-spatial%20language:%20Enhanced%20imagery%20abilities%20in%20deaf%20and%20hearing%20ASL%20signers&author=K.%20Emmorey&author=S.%20M.%20Kosslyn&author=U.%20Bellugi&volume=46&issue=2&publication_year=1993&pages=139-181&pmid=8432094&doi=10.1016/0010-0277(93)90017-p&) ]
10. Emmorey K., &amp; Tversky B. (2002). Spatial perspective choice in ASL. Sign Language &amp; Linguistics, 5(1), 3-26. doi: 10.1075/sll.5.1.03emm [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1075/sll.5.1.03emm) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Sign%20Language%20&%20Linguistics&title=Spatial%20perspective%20choice%20in%20ASL&author=K.%20Emmorey&author=B.%20Tversky&volume=5&issue=1&publication_year=2002&pages=3-26&doi=10.1075/sll.5.1.03emm&) ]
11. Flavell J. H., Everett B. A., Croft K., &amp; Flavell E. R. (1981). Young children's knowledge about visual perception: Further evidence for the level 1-level 2 distinction. Developmental Psychology, 17(1), 99-103. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.17.1.99 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.17.1.99) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Developmental%20Psychology&title=Young%20children%27s%20knowledge%20about%20visual%20perception:%20Further%20evidence%20for%20the%20level%201%E2%80%93level%202%20distinction&author=J.%20H.%20Flavell&author=B.%20A.%20Everett&author=K.%20Croft&author=E.%20R.%20Flavell&volume=17&issue=1&publication_year=1981&pages=99-103&doi=10.1037/0012-1649.17.1.99&) ]
12. Hamilton A. F. D. C., Brindley R., &amp; Frith U. (2009). Visual perspective taking impairment in children with autistic spectrum disorder. Cognition, 113(1), 37-44. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2011.12.004 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2011.12.004) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19682673/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cognition&title=Visual%20perspective%20taking%20impairment%20in%20children%20with%20autistic%20spectrum%20disorder&author=A.%20F.%20D.%20C.%20Hamilton&author=R.%20Brindley&author=U.%20Frith&volume=113&issue=1&publication_year=2009&pages=37-44&pmid=19682673&doi=10.1016/j.concog.2011.12.004&) ]
13. Hauser P. C., Paludneviciene R., Supalla T., &amp; Bavelier D. (2006). American Sign Language- Sentence reproduction test: Development and implications In Quadros R. M. (Ed.), Sign language: Spinning and unraveling the past, present and future (pp. 160-172). Petropolis, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil: Editora Arara Azul. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Sign%20language:%20Spinning%20and%20unraveling%20the%20past,%20present%20and%20future&author=P.%20C.%20Hauser&author=R.%20Paludneviciene&author=T.%20Supalla&author=D.%20Bavelier&publication_year=2006&) ]
14. Hegarty M., &amp; Waller D. (2004). A dissociation between mental rotation and perspective-taking spatial abilities. Intelligence, 32(2), 175-191. doi: 10.1016/j.intell.2003.12.001 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intell.2003.12.001) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Intelligence&title=A%20dissociation%20between%20mental%20rotation%20and%20perspective-taking%20spatial%20abilities&author=M.%20Hegarty&author=D.%20Waller&volume=32&issue=2&publication_year=2004&pages=175-191&doi=10.1016/j.intell.2003.12.001&) ]
15. Kaufman A. S., &amp; Kaufman N. L. (2004). Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test (2nd Ed.). Bloomington, MN: Pearson, Inc. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Kaufman%20Brief%20Intelligence%20Test&author=A.%20S.%20Kaufman&author=N.%20L.%20Kaufman&publication_year=2004&) ]
16. Kessler K., &amp; Rutherford H. (2010). The two forms of visuo-spatial perspective taking are differently embodied and subserve different spatial prepositions. Embodied and Grounded Cognition, 1, 213-225. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2010.00213 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2010.00213) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3153818) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21833268/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Embodied%20and%20Grounded%20Cognition&title=The%20two%20forms%20of%20visuo-spatial%20perspective%20taking%20are%20differently%20embodied%20and%20subserve%20different%20spatial%20prepositions&author=K.%20Kessler&author=H.%20Rutherford&volume=1&publication_year=2010&pages=213-225&pmid=21833268&doi=10.3389/fphys.2010.00213&) ]
17. Kessler K., &amp; Thomson L. A. (2010). The embodied nature of spatial perspective taking: Embodied transformation versus sensorimotor interference. Cognition, 114(1), 72-88. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2009.08.015 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2009.08.015) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19782971/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cognition&title=The%20embodied%20nature%20of%20spatial%20perspective%20taking:%20Embodied%20transformation%20versus%20sensorimotor%20interference&author=K.%20Kessler&author=L.%20A.%20Thomson&volume=114&issue=1&publication_year=2010&pages=72-88&pmid=19782971&doi=10.1016/j.cognition.2009.08.015&) ]
18. Kessler K., &amp; Wang H. (2012). Spatial perspective taking is an embodied process, but not for everyone in the same way: Differences predicted by sex and social skills score. Spatial Cognition &amp; Computation, 12(2-3), 133-158. doi: 10.1080/13875868.2011.634533 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/13875868.2011.634533) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Spatial%20Cognition%20&%20Computation&title=Spatial%20perspective%20taking%20is%20an%20embodied%20process,%20but%20not%20for%20everyone%20in%20the%20same%20way:%20Differences%20predicted%20by%20sex%20and%20social%20skills%20score&author=K.%20Kessler&author=H.%20Wang&volume=12&issue=2%E2%80%933&publication_year=2012&pages=133-158&doi=10.1080/13875868.2011.634533&) ]
19. Marschark M., Spencer L. J., Durkin A., Borgna G., Convertino C., Machmer E., ... Trani A. (2015). Understanding language, hearing status, and visual-spatial skills. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 20(4), 310-330. doi: 10.1093/deafed/env025 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/deafed/env025) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4836709) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26141071/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Deaf%20Studies%20and%20Deaf%20Education&title=Understanding%20language,%20hearing%20status,%20and%20visual-spatial%20skills&author=M.%20Marschark&author=L.%20J.%20Spencer&author=A.%20Durkin&author=G.%20Borgna&author=C.%20Convertino&volume=20&issue=4&publication_year=2015&pages=310-330&pmid=26141071&doi=10.1093/deafed/env025&) ]
20. Martin A. J., &amp; Sera M. D. (2006). The acquisition of spatial constructions in American Sign Language and English. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 11(4), 391-402. doi: 10.1093/deafed/enl004 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/deafed/enl004) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16785257/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Deaf%20Studies%20and%20Deaf%20Education&title=The%20acquisition%20of%20spatial%20constructions%20in%20American%20Sign%20Language%20and%20English&author=A.%20J.%20Martin&author=M.%20D.%20Sera&volume=11&issue=4&publication_year=2006&pages=391-402&pmid=16785257&doi=10.1093/deafed/enl004&) ]
21. Masangkay Z. S., McCluskey K. A., McIntyre C. W., Sims-Knight J., Vaughn B. E., &amp; Flavell J. H. (1974). The early development of inferences about the visual percepts of others. Child Development, 45(2), 357-366. doi: 10.2307/1127956 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2307/1127956) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/4837714/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Child%20Development&title=The%20early%20development%20of%20inferences%20about%20the%20visual%20percepts%20of%20others&author=Z.%20S.%20Masangkay&author=K.%20A.%20McCluskey&author=C.%20W.%20McIntyre&author=J.%20Sims-Knight&author=B.%20E.%20Vaughn&volume=45&issue=2&publication_year=1974&pages=357-366&pmid=4837714&doi=10.2307/1127956&) ]
22. Michelon P., &amp; Zacks J. M. (2006). Two kinds of visual perspective taking. Perception &amp; Psychophysics, 68(2), 327-337. doi: 10.3758/bf03193680 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03193680) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16773904/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Perception%20&%20Psychophysics&title=Two%20kinds%20of%20visual%20perspective%20taking&author=P.%20Michelon&author=J.%20M.%20Zacks&volume=68&issue=2&publication_year=2006&pages=327-337&pmid=16773904&doi=10.3758/bf03193680&) ]
23. Mohr C., Rowe A. C., &amp; Blanke O. (2010). The influence of sex and empathy on putting oneself in the shoes of others. British Journal of Psychology, 101(2), 277-291. doi: 10.1348/000712609x457450 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1348/000712609x457450) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19619391/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=British%20Journal%20of%20Psychology&title=The%20influence%20of%20sex%20and%20empathy%20on%20putting%20oneself%20in%20the%20shoes%20of%20others&author=C.%20Mohr&author=A.%20C.%20Rowe&author=O.%20Blanke&volume=101&issue=2&publication_year=2010&pages=277-291&pmid=19619391&doi=10.1348/000712609x457450&) ]
24. Peters M. (2005). Sex differences and the factor of time in solving Vandenberg and Kuse mental rotation problems. Brain and Cognition, 57(2), 176-184. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2004.08.052 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2004.08.052) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15708213/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Brain%20and%20Cognition&title=Sex%20differences%20and%20the%20factor%20of%20time%20in%20solving%20Vandenberg%20and%20Kuse%20mental%20rotation%20problems&author=M.%20Peters&volume=57&issue=2&publication_year=2005&pages=176-184&pmid=15708213&doi=10.1016/j.bandc.2004.08.052&) ]
25. Peters M., Laeng B., Latham K., Jackson M., Zaiyouna R., &amp; Richardson C. (1995). A redrawn Vandenberg and Kuse mental rotations test-different versions and factors that affect performance. Brain and Cognition, 28(1), 39-58. doi: 10.1006/brcg.1995.1032 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1006/brcg.1995.1032) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7546667/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Brain%20and%20Cognition&title=A%20redrawn%20Vandenberg%20and%20Kuse%20mental%20rotations%20test-different%20versions%20and%20factors%20that%20affect%20performance&author=M.%20Peters&author=B.%20Laeng&author=K.%20Latham&author=M.%20Jackson&author=R.%20Zaiyouna&volume=28&issue=1&publication_year=1995&pages=39-58&pmid=7546667&doi=10.1006/brcg.1995.1032&) ]
26. Pyers J., Perniss P., &amp; Emmorey K (2008). Viewpoint in the visual-spatial modality Paper presented at the 30th Annual Convention of the German Society of Linguistics workshop on Gestures: A Comparison of Signed and Spoken Languages, Bamberg, Germany, February. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Paper%20presented%20at%20the%2030th%20Annual%20Convention%20of%20the%20German%20Society%20of%20Linguistics%20workshop%20on%20Gestures:%20A%20Comparison%20of%20Signed%20and%20Spoken%20Languages&author=J.%20Pyers&author=P.%20Perniss&author=K%20Emmorey&publication_year=2008&) ]
27. Pyers J. E., Perniss P., &amp; Emmorey K. (2015). Viewpoint in the visual-spatial modality: The coordination of spatial perspective. Spatial Cognition &amp; Computation, 15(3), 143-169. doi: 10.1080/13875868.2014.1003933 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/13875868.2014.1003933) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4788639) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26981027/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Spatial%20Cognition%20&%20Computation&title=Viewpoint%20in%20the%20visual-spatial%20modality:%20The%20coordination%20of%20spatial%20perspective&author=J.%20E.%20Pyers&author=P.%20Perniss&author=K.%20Emmorey&volume=15&issue=3&publication_year=2015&pages=143-169&pmid=26981027&doi=10.1080/13875868.2014.1003933&) ]
28. Quinto-Pozos D., &amp; Hou L. (2013). Development of perspective- taking skills by deaf signing children Poster presentation at the 11th Theoretical Issues in Sign Language Research Conference, London, U.K., July. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Poster%20presentation%20at%20the%2011th%20Theoretical%20Issues%20in%20Sign%20Language%20Research%20Conference&author=D.%20Quinto-Pozos&author=L.%20Hou&publication_year=2013&) ]
29. Quinto-Pozos D., Singleton J. L., Hauser P. C., Levine S. C., Garberoglio C. L., &amp; Hou L. (2013). Atypical signed language development: A case study of challenges with visual-spatial processing. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 30(5), 332-359. doi: 10.1080/02643294.2013.863756 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2013.863756) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24344817/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Cognitive%20Neuropsychology&title=Atypical%20signed%20language%20development:%20A%20case%20study%20of%20challenges%20with%20visual%E2%80%93spatial%20processing&author=D.%20Quinto-Pozos&author=J.%20L.%20Singleton&author=P.%20C.%20Hauser&author=S.%20C.%20Levine&author=C.%20L.%20Garberoglio&volume=30&issue=5&publication_year=2013&pages=332-359&pmid=24344817&doi=10.1080/02643294.2013.863756&) ]
30. Schembri A. C. (2003). Rethinking "classifiers" in signed languages In Emmorey K. (Ed.), Perspectives on classifier constructions in sign languages (pp. 3-34). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Perspectives%20on%20classifier%20constructions%20in%20sign%20languages&author=A.%20C.%20Schembri&publication_year=2003&) ]
31. Schick B. (1990). The effects of morphosyntactic structure on the acquisition of classifier predicates in ASL In Lucas C. (Ed.), Sign language research: Theoretical issues (pp. 358-374). Washington D.C.: Gallaudet University Press. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Sign%20language%20research:%20Theoretical%20issues&author=B.%20Schick&publication_year=1990&) ]
32. Secora K. (2016). The impact of individual differences in social skills and executive control on visual-spatial perspective-taking in signers and nonsigners. Doctoral dissertation UC San Diego. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=The%20impact%20of%20individual%20differences%20in%20social%20skills%20and%20executive%20control%20on%20visual-spatial%20perspective-taking%20in%20signers%20and%20nonsigners&author=K.%20Secora&publication_year=2016&) ]
33. Secora K., &amp; Emmorey K. (2019). Social abilities and visual-spatial perspective-taking skill: Deaf signers and hearing nonsigners. The Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education, 24(3), 201-213. 10.1093/deafed/enz006 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1093/deafed/enz006) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC6546156) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30882873/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=The%20Journal%20of%20Deaf%20Studies%20and%20Deaf%20Education&title=Social%20abilities%20and%20visual-spatial%20perspective-taking%20skill:%20Deaf%20signers%20and%20hearing%20nonsigners&author=K.%20Secora&author=K.%20Emmorey&volume=24&issue=3&publication_year=2019&pages=201-213&pmid=30882873&doi=10.1093/deafed/enz006&) ]
34. Shelton A. L., Clements-Stephens A. M., Lam W. Y., Pak D. M., &amp; Murray A. J. (2012). Should social savvy equal good spatial skills? The interaction of social skills with spatial perspective taking. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141(2), 199-205. doi: 10.1037/a0024617 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1037/a0024617) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21787102/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Experimental%20Psychology:%20General&title=Should%20social%20savvy%20equal%20good%20spatial%20skills?%20The%20interaction%20of%20social%20skills%20with%20spatial%20perspective%20taking&author=A.%20L.%20Shelton&author=A.%20M.%20Clements-Stephens&author=W.%20Y.%20Lam&author=D.%20M.%20Pak&author=A.%20J.%20Murray&volume=141&issue=2&publication_year=2012&pages=199-205&pmid=21787102&doi=10.1037/a0024617&) ]
35. Shield A., &amp; Meier R. P. (2012). Palm reversal errors in native-signing children with autism. Journal of Communication Disorders, 45(6), 439-454. doi: 10.1016/j.jcomdis.2012.08.004 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2012.08.004) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC3479340) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22981637/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Journal%20of%20Communication%20Disorders&title=Palm%20reversal%20errors%20in%20native-signing%20children%20with%20autism&author=A.%20Shield&author=R.%20P.%20Meier&volume=45&issue=6&publication_year=2012&pages=439-454&pmid=22981637&doi=10.1016/j.jcomdis.2012.08.004&) ]
36. Shield A., Pyers J., Martin A., &amp; Tager-Flusberg H. (2016). Relations between language and cognition in native-signing children with autism spectrum disorder. Autism Research, 9(12), 1304-1315. doi: 10.1002/aur.1621 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.1621) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26938935/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Autism%20Research&title=Relations%20between%20language%20and%20cognition%20in%20native-signing%20children%20with%20autism%20spectrum%20disorder&author=A.%20Shield&author=J.%20Pyers&author=A.%20Martin&author=H.%20Tager-Flusberg&volume=9&issue=12&publication_year=2016&pages=1304-1315&pmid=26938935&doi=10.1002/aur.1621&) ]
37. Slobin D. I., Hoiting N., Kuntze M., Lindert R., Weinberg A., Pyers J., ... Thumann H. (2003). A cognitive/functional perspective on the acquisition of "classifiers." In Emmorey K. (Ed.), Perspectives on classifier constructions in sign languages (pp. 271-296). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Perspectives%20on%20classifier%20constructions%20in%20sign%20languages&author=D.%20I.%20Slobin&author=N.%20Hoiting&author=M.%20Kuntze&author=R.%20Lindert&author=A.%20Weinberg&publication_year=2003&) ]
38. Supalla T. (1986). The classifier system in American Sign Language In Craig C. G. (Ed.), Noun classes and categorization (pp. 181-214). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Company. doi: 10.1075/tsl.7.13sup [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1075/tsl.7.13sup) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Noun%20classes%20and%20categorization&author=T.%20Supalla&publication_year=1986&) ]
39. Supalla T., Hauser P. C., &amp; Bavelier D. (2014). Reproducing American Sign Language sentences: Cognitive scaffolding in working memory. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 859. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00859 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00859) ] [ [PMC free article](/articles/PMC4126373) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25152744/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Frontiers%20in%20Psychology&title=Reproducing%20American%20Sign%20Language%20sentences:%20Cognitive%20scaffolding%20in%20working%20memory&author=T.%20Supalla&author=P.%20C.%20Hauser&author=D.%20Bavelier&volume=5&publication_year=2014&pages=859&pmid=25152744&doi=10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00859&) ]
40. Talbot K. F., &amp; Haude R. H. (1993). The relation between sign language skill and spatial visualization ability: Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 77(3f), 1387-1391. doi: 10.2466/pms.1993.77.3f.1387 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.1993.77.3f.1387) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/8170794/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Perceptual%20and%20Motor%20Skills&title=The%20relation%20between%20sign%20language%20skill%20and%20spatial%20visualization%20ability:%20Mental%20rotation%20of%20three-dimensional%20objects&author=K.%20F.%20Talbot&author=R.%20H.%20Haude&volume=77&issue=3f&publication_year=1993&pages=1387-1391&pmid=8170794&doi=10.2466/pms.1993.77.3f.1387&) ]
41. Valli C., Lucas C., Mulrooney K. J., &amp; Villanueva M. (2011). Linguistics of American Sign Language: An introduction. Washington D.C.: Gallaudet University Press. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?title=Linguistics%20of%20American%20Sign%20Language:%20An%20introduction&author=C.%20Valli&author=C.%20Lucas&author=K.%20J.%20Mulrooney&author=M.%20Villanueva&publication_year=2011&) ]
42. Vandenberg S. G., &amp; Kuse A. R. (1978). Mental rotations, a group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47(2), 599-604. doi: 10.2466/pms.1978.47.2.599 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.1978.47.2.599) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/724398/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Perceptual%20and%20Motor%20Skills&title=Mental%20rotations,%20a%20group%20test%20of%20three-dimensional%20spatial%20visualization&author=S.%20G.%20Vandenberg&author=A.%20R.%20Kuse&volume=47&issue=2&publication_year=1978&pages=599-604&pmid=724398&doi=10.2466/pms.1978.47.2.599&) ]
43. Voyer D., Voyer S., &amp; Bryden M. P. (1995). Magnitude of sex differences in spatial abilities: A meta-analysis and consideration of critical variables. Psychological Bulletin, 117(2), 250. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.117.2.250 [ [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.117.2.250) ] [ [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7724690/) ] [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Psychological%20Bulletin&title=Magnitude%20of%20sex%20differences%20in%20spatial%20abilities:%20A%20meta-analysis%20and%20consideration%20of%20critical%20variables&author=D.%20Voyer&author=S.%20Voyer&author=M.%20P.%20Bryden&volume=117&issue=2&publication_year=1995&pages=250&pmid=7724690&doi=10.1037/0033-2909.117.2.250&) ]
44. Zacks J. M., Mires J., Tversky B., &amp; Hazeltine E. (2000). Mental spatial transformations of objects and perspective. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 2(4), 315-332. [ [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?journal=Spatial%20Cognition%20and%20Computation&title=Mental%20spatial%20transformations%20of%20objects%20and%20perspective&author=J.%20M.%20Zacks&author=J.%20Mires&author=B.%20Tversky&author=E.%20Hazeltine&volume=2&issue=4&publication_year=2000&pages=315-332&) ]

Close

<!-- image -->

## ACTIONS

- [View on publisher site](https://doi.org/10.1093/deafed/enaa006)
View on publisher site icon

<!-- image -->
- [PDF (367.6 KB)](pdf/enaa006.pdf)
Download PDF icon

<!-- image -->
- Cite
Cite icon

<!-- image -->
- Permalink
Permalink icon

<!-- image -->

## RESOURCES

### Similar articles

### Cited by other articles

### Links to NCBI Databases

Back to Top

back to top icon

<!-- image -->

## Cited by

- [[142b2111cb9e1e29694f6c1155dcc3850d5b307f]] — Leveraging Usefulness and Autonomy: Designing AI-Mediated ASL Communication Between Hearing Parents and Deaf Children (2025)
- [[81211c0c742caa3222951a881aa7b0d8099e04af]] — Spatial Cognition, Modality and Language Emergence: Cognitive Representation of Space in Yucatec Maya Sign Language (Mexico) (2024)
- [[e8bb796a6fec53b849afe53b023e785dfcf01d57]] — Geometry in the brain optimized for sign language - A unique role of the anterior superior parietal lobule in deaf signers. (2024)
- [[51610446869528aa99e46b2a6aec86a31b834fbe]] — Viewing angle matters in British Sign Language processing (2024)
- [[5e4b24b714bc126e6eab17a937b658431b0400e4]] — L2 Learners’ Signed Language Processing Relates, In Part, to Perspective‐Taking Skills (2023)
- [[0daadb9d4b9d19f74095654f702578d416617e8f]] — Disability does not negatively impact linguistic visual-spatial processing for hearing adult learners of a signed language (2023)
- [[fdf143951eccdf5d5c3cf8d4068b2138957baa1a]] — Ten Things You Should Know About Sign Languages (2023)
- [[c31b1333eb63b974cfd9960bc992001ac9696041]] — Verbal, Figural, and Arithmetic Fluency of Children with Cochlear Implants (2023)
- [[8eb1fdd56373141f51be02a1eb077535e3276d53]] — Over-reliance on English hinders cognitive science. (2022)
- [[942bf31f7f4bfaec62c67c06ca8eda13b477ec2c]] — Emergence of a Signing Advantage: An Investigation of Spatial Abilities of Adult Hearing L2 Learners of ASL (2022)
- [[b9f0ecd7f25df1addcd0a5cd389046ff6cca0eb9]] — ASL Assessment in Practice: Assessing American Sign Language Across Clinical Settings (2022)
- [[7dc91e00dc83059a2970399b4f53241ea5933c4e]] — Spatial perspective-taking: insights from sensory impairments (2021)
- [[593d1a94872ad17f3a7d69f10e788d89ad193f9a]] — The neural correlates for spatial language: Perspective-dependent and -independent relationships in American Sign Language and spoken English (2021)
- [[83af7181b1ad97e5776605fac42efe5c8cc3342d]] — Analysis of Smartphone Application Mastery in Distance Learning for Deaf Children in Secondary School (2021)
- [[aee80e15af154e1bf5e12c626340f8b09eb1a6a3]] — The interaction of the visuo-spatial and the vestibular system depends on sensory experience in development. (2020)
- [[00bb6d841bc0ff44b3a09a8c4cbb6f75ea58cd54]] — A Positive Relationship Between Sign Language Comprehension and Mental Rotation Abilities. (2020)

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: pdf
- bibtex: semanticscholar
