---
semanticScholarId: "00d124fd3f88965def1c33ac92bec28d07d908b1"
bibKey: null
year: 2015
title: "Understanding Indoor Play in Deaf Children: An Analysis of Play Behaviors"
doi: "10.4236/PSYCH.2015.61002"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: false
expanded: false
topics: ["Psychology", "Education", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Understanding Indoor Play in Deaf Children: An Analysis of Play Behaviors

**Year:** [[2015]]
**Topics:** [[topics/psychology|Psychology]], [[topics/education|Education]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Millicent M. Musyoka

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00d124fd3f88965def1c33ac92bec28d07d908b1)
- [PDF](http://www.scirp.org/journal/PaperDownload.aspx?paperID=53204)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4236/PSYCH.2015.61002)

## Abstract

Play is an important element of cognitive, social and language development. Most preschool classrooms provide opportunity for indoor play and studies are needed to improve indoor play contexts for all children, including deaf children. The present study documented and described the play behaviors of Ann, a four-year-old native American Sign Language (ASL) deaf child in an ASL/ English bilingual classroom. Ann engaged in various play behaviors, in different play centers, and with different play partners. The sample consisted of 22 play episodes collected over a period of one year. A combination of social and cognitive play behavior categories based on Rubin’s (2001) Play Observation Scale were used for documenting and the coding of the play behaviors observed. The results revealed that Ann was capable of engaging in developmentally appropriate play behaviors that were similar to those reported for hearing children her age. In addition, her play behaviors varied in relation to the play context and play partners. Teacher’s decisions and control of play in the classroom appeared to have an impact on the play behaviors Ann demonstrated.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Musyoka2015UnderstandingIP,
 author = {Millicent M. Musyoka},
 journal = {Psychology},
 pages = {10-19},
 title = {Understanding Indoor Play in Deaf Children: An Analysis of Play Behaviors},
 volume = {06},
 year = {2015}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
