---
semanticScholarId: "0116accf9942c0e8e802497be099346074b0c76f"
bibKey: null
year: 2025
title: "ANALYSIS OF THE PRACTICALITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF ANDROID-BASED SIGN LANGUAGE RECOGNITION LEARNING MEDIA IN AN EXCEPTIONAL SCHOOL"
doi: "10.59562/jvkt.v3i1.7827"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Education", "Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# ANALYSIS OF THE PRACTICALITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF ANDROID-BASED SIGN LANGUAGE RECOGNITION LEARNING MEDIA IN AN EXCEPTIONAL SCHOOL

**Year:** [[2025]]
**Topics:** [[topics/education|Education]], [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** F. Faisal; Yunus Tjandi; H. Jaya

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0116accf9942c0e8e802497be099346074b0c76f)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.59562/jvkt.v3i1.7827)

## Abstract

The purpose of this study is to analyze the practicality and effectiveness of android-based sign language recognition learning media applications as an alternative to learning media in extraordinary schools (SLB). This type of research is Research and Development (R&D) with the Concurrent Triangulation design combination method.The  subjects of the study were 20 sign language teachers from three SLB schools in the cities of Makassar and Gowa as well as application users who assessed the practicality and effectiveness of the learning media applications that they would teach to deaf students.  The data collection technique consists of observation, interviews, literature studies and the distribution of questionnaires/questionnaires. Meanwhile, the instruments used include observation sheets, interview sheets and questionnaire/questionnaire sheets. There are 10 criteria data components to assess the practicality of learning media applications and 15 criteria data components to assess the effectiveness of learning media applications.  The results showed that the level of practicality of learning media was 3.65 while the effectiveness level of learning media was 3.41. By using the Likert scale, it can be concluded that android-based sign language recognition learning media applications are very practical and very effective for teachers to use as an alternative to sign language recognition learning media in SLB.

## TL;DR

It can be concluded that android-based sign language recognition learning media applications are very practical and very effective for teachers to use as an alternative to sign language recognition learning media in SLB.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Faisal2025ANALYSISOT,
 author = {F. Faisal and Yunus Tjandi and H. Jaya},
 booktitle = {Jurnal Vokasi Keteknikan},
 journal = {Jurnal Vokasi Keteknikan},
 title = {ANALYSIS OF THE PRACTICALITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF ANDROID-BASED SIGN LANGUAGE RECOGNITION LEARNING MEDIA IN AN EXCEPTIONAL SCHOOL},
 year = {2025}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
