---
semanticScholarId: "0144afbef9a755a9bccd8784d2a8c318a1ae227c"
bibKey: null
year: 2023
title: "Burnout degree among sign language interpreters in Jordan and its relationship to levels of experience and self-concept"
doi: "10.35875/1105-026-002-009"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Linguistics", "Education"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Burnout degree among sign language interpreters in Jordan and its relationship to levels of experience and self-concept

**Year:** [[2023]]
**Topics:** [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]], [[topics/education|Education]]
**Authors:** Anan Abumariam; Nazem Qandeel

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0144afbef9a755a9bccd8784d2a8c318a1ae227c)
- [PDF](http://albalqajournal.ammanu.edu.jo/pdfs/19/2/019002001.pdf)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.35875/1105-026-002-009)

## Abstract

Background & Statement of the problem: The field of sign language interpretation for the deaf is considered one of the most ambiguous fields due to the lack of studies and the limited complete descriptive information. Objectives: The aim of the research is to identify the level of burnout among sign language interpreters in Jordan and its relationship to self-concept and experience. Methods: The descriptive correlative approach was adopted, and after applying the tools and collecting information, the Maslash scale was used to measure the level of burnout, and the Tennessee scale to measure the level of self-concept, theThe appropriate statistical methods were used. Results: the following results were reached: 1- The level of total burnout was at an average level. 2- The level of the total self-concept was at a high level. 3- There are statistically significant differences for the level of burnout according to the variable number of years of experience, as burnout increases with the advancement of experience. 4- There is a negative inverse relationship with statistical significance between the total burnout and the total self-concept, as the self-concept declines with the increase in the level of burnout. Conclusions (Recommendations and contributions): The research recommended conducting qualitative studies of the psychological burnout variable, working on developing the sign language interpreter professionally and socially, conducting training and qualifying courses for sign language interpreters in Jordan on a regular basis, and providing the material and moral reward for the sign language interpreters.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Abumariam2023BurnoutDA,
 author = {Anan Abumariam and Nazem Qandeel},
 booktitle = {Al-Balqa Journal for Research and Studies},
 journal = {Al-Balqa Journal for Research and Studies},
 title = {Burnout degree among sign language interpreters in Jordan and its relationship to levels of experience and self-concept},
 year = {2023}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
