---
semanticScholarId: "014bbb6a6e2f0c6ef7c96e21875ddc8066547ba7"
bibKey: null
year: 2024
title: "Multi-Stream Isolated Sign Language Recognition Based on Finger Features Derived from Pose Data"
doi: "10.3390/electronics13081591"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Multi-Stream Isolated Sign Language Recognition Based on Finger Features Derived from Pose Data

**Year:** [[2024]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Ali Akdağ; Omer Kaan Baykan

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/014bbb6a6e2f0c6ef7c96e21875ddc8066547ba7)
- [PDF](https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/13/8/1591/pdf?version=1713776815)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics13081591)

## Abstract

This study introduces an innovative multichannel approach that focuses on the features and configurations of fingers in isolated sign language recognition. The foundation of this approach is based on three different types of data, derived from finger pose data obtained using MediaPipe and processed in separate channels. Using these multichannel data, we trained the proposed MultiChannel-MobileNetV2 model to provide a detailed analysis of finger movements. In our study, we first subject the features extracted from all trained models to dimensionality reduction using Principal Component Analysis. Subsequently, we combine these processed features for classification using a Support Vector Machine. Furthermore, our proposed method includes processing body and facial information using MobileNetV2. Our final proposed sign language recognition method has achieved remarkable accuracy rates of 97.15%, 95.13%, 99.78%, and 95.37% on the BosphorusSign22k-general, BosphorusSign22k, LSA64, and GSL datasets, respectively. These results underscore the generalizability and adaptability of the proposed method, proving its competitive edge over existing studies in the literature.

## TL;DR

This study introduces an innovative multichannel approach that focuses on the features and configurations of fingers in isolated sign language recognition, and trains the proposed MultiChannel-MobileNetV2 model to provide a detailed analysis of finger movements.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Akdağ2024MultiStreamIS,
 author = {Ali Akdağ and Omer Kaan Baykan},
 booktitle = {Electronics},
 journal = {Electronics},
 title = {Multi-Stream Isolated Sign Language Recognition Based on Finger Features Derived from Pose Data},
 year = {2024}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
