---
semanticScholarId: "01728281739942c34f7b11b7553ab17cc8b84f0a"
bibKey: null
year: 2020
title: "Automatic system for Arabic Sign Language Recognition and translation to spoken One"
doi: "10.30534/ijatcse/2020/37952020"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "pdf"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: none
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: pdf
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Automatic system for Arabic Sign Language Recognition and translation to spoken One

**Year:** [[2020]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01728281739942c34f7b11b7553ab17cc8b84f0a)
- [PDF](https://doi.org/10.30534/ijatcse/2020/37952020)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.30534/ijatcse/2020/37952020)

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{None,
 booktitle = {International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering},
 journal = {International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering},
 title = {Automatic system for Arabic Sign Language Recognition and translation to spoken One},
 year = {2020}
}
```

## Full Text

Mokhtar M. Mohamed,

## International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering

Available Online at http://www.warse.org/IJATCSE/static/pdf/file/ijatcse37952020.pdf

https://doi.org/10.30534/ijatcse/2020/37952020

## Automatic system for Arabic Sign Language Recognition and translation to spoken One

<!-- image -->

## Mokhtar M. Mohamed

Assistant Professor, Department of Natural and Applied Sciences, Unaizah Community College, Qassim University, Saudi Arabia, h.hassien@qu.edu.sa Assistant Professor Department of Computer and Information Systems, Sadat Academy, Assiut,  Egypt



## ABSTRACT

The deaf-mutes person suffers from inability to speak as well as inability to hear others. This disability creates a barrier that prevents the disabled from integrating with society. Therefore, the owners of this disability attempt to break this barrier by using many methods to try to communicate with others. The most famous of these methods is the sign language which is relying on the body language. The disabled person uses facial expressions and hand  gestures to  express his needs. In this project, we will try to build a computerized system depending on the depth-measuring cameras and computer vision techniques  to  capturing  and  segmenting  the  pictures  of  the facial expressions and hand gestures. The segmented gestures are  classified  and  stored  in  an  electronic  library  after  they have  been  recognized  and  linked  with  their  corresponding spoken and written Arabic words. The computerized system will  be  learned  with  gestures  and  its  corresponding  spoken and written Arabic words. A gesture dataset of 40-segmented words that frequently used in the life by the hearing-impaired person  was  utilized  for  testing  the  system.  We  get  in  our consideration  that  each  word  may  has  a  different  occlusion state.  The  experimental  results  illustrated  that  the  proposed system has a recognition accuracy over 90%

Key words: Sign language, Segmentation, Tracking, Recognition, Kinect, Fuzzy C-mean, Neural Networks

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Sign  Language  (SL)  is  not  like  spoken  languages.  It depends on vision instead of hearing. Deaf person uses SL to communicate with deaf community or with hearing one. The popular belief that SL is an international language is not the truth. This adds further difficulties on either deaf community  or  hearing  one. One  can  suggest written communication instead of SL to overcome its difficulties. In  fact, this  mean  of  communication is  very  cumbersome and most of deaf people unknown writing spoken language. In  addition,  written  communication  is  very  slow  in  real time  conversation.  Signer  can  communicate  with  other communities through  SL  by  moving their hands, moving their body and by facial expressions. Moving hand or body produces  gestures,  which  can  be  translated  to  a  spoken language. Actually, hearing people who understand SL are very  rare.    Only  a  skilled  person  can  do  this  translation. Recently, many innovations tried to translate automatically from  SL  to  spoken  language  and  vice  versa  utilizing computer vision techniques. These techniques are used in somehow  to  construct  a  computerized  system  for  SL recognition. This system assists the deaf person to communicate  easily  with  hearing  one.    SL  recognition systems can be classified to two different categories. The first one is for a single gesture while the second one is for a sentence of gestures.

In both  previous  categories, the sign gesture can  be composed  from  hand  motion  in  addition  to  hand  shape. This type of sign is called manual components. On the other hand, the sign gesture which composed from hand motion, hand shape in addition to facial expressions is called non manual  components.  In  this  work,  we  study  the  isolated sign  gesture  using  manual  components  for  Arabic  sign language (ASL).

The SL recognition system based on manual components processes  the  sign  gesture  according  to  hand  movement simultaneously  with  hand  shape.  The  process  tracks  the sign  gesture  from  the  starting  to  stop  of  the  sign  as illustrated  in  [40].  Our  proposed  system  for  sign  gesture recognition  based  on  isolated  sign  for  ASL  is  shown  in Figure 1.

For each sign gesture, the proposed system tracks the hand in each frame. The tracking mechanism uses two different models: one is the observation model and the other is the dynamic model. The observation model contains information  about  the  hand  motion  and  pre-trained  hand samples by Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). While, the  dynamic  model contains information about hand location in the interest frame  and its velocity. This mechanism  helps  us  to  determine  the  interested  region based on motion information. On other hand, it confirms the presence of hand in the interested region based on the trained CCN.

The tracking mechanism begins its job by segmenting the hands  from  the  backgrounds.  Each  segmented  hand  is assumed  as  a  tracking  candidate  state.  This  candidate contains information about hand location. According to this information, the hand  patch images  is  extracted  from the entire patch frame. The extracted hand patch images will be assumed as the input of the observation model. In this stage of  tracking  process,  the  pre-trained  CCN  will  produce  a hand  feature  vector  (HFV)  for  highest  likelihood  hand patch.  Each  HFV  contains information about hand  shape and location  for  certain  hand  patch.  Finally,  the  detected HFV is used to extract the corresponding audio translation from the pre-build database.

The  overall  proposed  system  is  dedicated  to  Arabic  deaf people  as  mentioned  before.  Therefore,  we  consider  the Arabic  sign  language  (ASL)  vocabularies  as  depicted  in dictionary [19]. The system is equipped with depth camera and monitor. It may be placed in lecture halls, conferences and airports. The system can be impeded in mobile devices to  help  disabled  person  to  communicate  at  home  and market as well as hold chat conversations over the internet with hearing one in easy manner.

<!-- image -->

Overview of the proposed system for ASL recognition.

Figure 1:

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: state of arte and recent related works are discussed in section 2. A description  for  the  used  CCNs  is  illustrated  in  section  3. The Proposed hand tracking system and output is explained in section 4. Experimental results, discussion and database used  in  this  work  is  presented  in  section  5.  Finally,  our conclusion for the proposed system is given in section 6.

## 2. PREVIOUS WORKS

A computerized based recognition process for the grammatical structures of Arabic Sign Language (ASL) is a challenging problem. Early, researchers have concentrated their  attention  to  recognize  the  finger  gestures,  facial expressions, isolated gesture, and words of  interrogative like How, Where, When, and What. Also, another challenge is verification of sentences and its grammatical structures. In addition, some classifiers tended to surrogate the hand gestures for the deaf-mutes people and the objects classes information about its location, its movement and its appearance.

In general, gathering information about sign gesture can be achieved  through  two  different  methods  such  as  direct measurement or vision base. Direct measurement depends on extra equipment like motion capturing sensors and data gloves. While vision based detects and tracks sign gesture in natural environment without extra equipment.

Through  direct  measurement  methods,  obtaining  spatial information about finger movement, hand shape and body posture is accurate. Although researchers who use this type of gathering data are easily obtain information about finger, hand and body posture in accurate manner. They found it inapplicable in natural circumstances. Because deaf person will face several difficulties to wear devices, which restrict his movement in addition to its complicated to setup [20], [21], [22], [23].

Due to the several difficulties in applying direct measurement methodologies, researchers preferred to use vision  based  methodologies.  In  this  type  of  sign  gesture recognition, researchers depends on a camera or a group of cameras  to  capture  images  and  store  it  in  a  sequence  of two-dimensional images. So, it easy to capture gestures and record as simple as we do in our real live. However, vision base  methods  have  challenges  such  as  camera  quality, noise, illumination. Interested region and tracking. Most of researches  based  on  vision  use  color  images  as  input  to their  systems.  The  need  for  color  image  is  to  facilitate classification of hand candidate and face expressions based on the human skin-tone color [24], [25], [43], [46]. Other researches  use  colored  gloves  and  face  masks  to  achieve sign  gesture  classification  process  [26],  [27],  [28],  [44], [45].

Kelly  et  al.  [29]  proposed  a  system  for  SL  recognition. They  used  the  mean  shift  algorithm  in  tracking  colored gloves. They segment the glove region by using the back projection technique, which computed using the mean shift algorithm.  From  the  segmented  region,  the  hand  contour can be extracted. Oya et al. [1] explained another similar work to track the hand gestures. The authors used gloves with  blue  and  yellow  colors.  They  utilized  the  histogram bins  and  a  predefined  threshold  to  segment  the  gestures from  the  image.  By  this  approach,  they  utilized  colored glove to find out the hand and finger positions.

Zou et al. [30] used mean shift with Kalman filter to track hand. They used mean shift algorithm in updating the sign gesture model Whereas, Kalman filter is used in tracking hand. They used mean shift algorithm due to its computational  efficient  and  its  robustness  against  pose variance. On the other hand, it failed to track with efficient object that has extreme illumination variance and that has fast  moving. The  disadvantage of the mean  shift is explained in [31]. The authors returned this disadvantage to the  dependence  of  mean  shift  algorithm  on  histogram information and ignore spatial information. Nadgeri et al. [32] used CAMShift algorithm to overcome the illumination changes. Also, CAMShift use adaptive window with not fixed  size. The window size is changed according the object size.

A system based on vision was proposed in [2] to segment gestures based on skin color information only. They used a Kalman filter [3] technique to track the gestures.  Kalman filter  is  one  of  the  earliest  algorithms  that  still  used  in visual  tracking.  It  estimates  the  linear  states,  dynamic system in discreet-time in efficient manner. Kian et al. [33] explained a real-time system. They used Kalman filter to track linearly  the hand's location  based  on  skin  color.  As mentioned in [34] kalman filter has a strong robustness and advantages under occlusion states. However, according to [35], kalman filter and its variants have uncertainty in case of  Gaussian  distribution  and  cannot  maintain  multiple hypotheses.Another system in [4] was proposed depending on  snake  methodology  to  separate  and  tracking  the  face expressions and hands gestures. The snake tracking technique  has  an advantage  in solving the occlusion problem.  A system in [5] combines the skin segmentation algorithms  with the  frame difference. This  system uses a probabilistic method to predicate position of the face and hands.

Another  filter  is  call  Particle  filter  has  been  applied  in several tracking system [36], [37], [38], [39]. The authors of these researches mentioned that particle filter has strong performance  in case of non-linear  dynamic  and  non Gaussian noise. Particle filter performance is based on two models, dynamic model and observational model. Dynamic model produces a distribution model for the noise. While, observational model produces a likelihood between target object and particle object. The object location is obtained according to the particle with high weight. A research for real  time  hand  tracking  is  proposed  in  [40].  The  authors used mean shift with particle filter as an estimator for non linear  posterior  density.  The  research  in  [1]  used  a  joint particle  filter  depends  on  two  ratios  for  calculation  the likelihood model  of  hand and head. They  used  the  mean shift  to  obtain  a  minimum  number  of  particles.  In  [41], authors proposed a tracking technique depends on gravity optimized particle filter.

Microsoft  Kinect  camera  was  used in [4] to  extract hand features based on its appearance and to track hand position in both 2D or 3D. the classification process is achieved by hold a comparison between hidden Markov model and the sequential pattern boosting. Another research used Microsoft  Kinect  in  [2].  The  authors  built  a  system  for Chinese sign language recognition. They construct Chinese sentences by using the language models with 3D trajectory movement  of  the  hand.  The  trajectory  is  registered  and matched with the stored in a gallery.

The depth information also was used in [6] to simplify the problem of segmentation and tracking the head and hands. The hands gestures are segmented according to the idea that the hands would be near the camera. Another system in [7] used the depth camera to recognize the sign language words that  are  constructed  with  the  finger  spelling.  The  Kinect camera was used in [8] to enhance the tracking process. The authors used skin color information as the main feature for segmentation. They claim that the results are improved on the used dataset, which consists of many different complex gestures. A mobile-based system for interpreting between hearing  and deaf-mutes people  was  proposed in [9]. The system is beneficial for achieving in communication on-the-go through the real time mode. Due to the processing  limitation  of  the  mobile  devices,  the  authors connected the system to a cloud-based framework.  They utilized the cloud system powerful resources by delegating all the heavy work of the proposed system.

The  authors  in  [10]  represents  an  automatic  visual  sing language recognition system that translate segmented Arabic sign words into text. Their system was constructed from four main stages: hand classification, feature extraction,  tracking  and  segmentation.  Based  on  the  face color tone for hand, they used a dynamic technique for skin detector  segmentation.  They  identified  and  tracked  the hands  according  to  a  skin-blob  technique.  A  system  to translate  from  sign  language  to  text  and  vice  versa  was proposed  in  [11].  This  system  depends  on  Canny's  edge detection algorithm [12] to segment the hand gestures. It also built a library of gestures and the corresponding text.

The authors in [13] proposed a system for converting the finger gesture spelled word to speech style and vice versa. The proposed system gets the hand gesture in continuous image  stream  and  converts  it  to  letter  of  alphabets.  The system  used  a  tracking  algorithm  based  on  continuously Adaptive  Meanshift  (Camshift)  [14]  to  jointly  track  the hands and face at same time. The authors [15] developed an Arabic  Language  recognition  system  that  based  on  a modern digital sensor called Leap Motion. It concentrates on  the  general  issues  in  vision-based  systems  such  as lighting  and  skin  color.  The  Leap motion  sensor  captures hands and fi ngers motions in a 3D digital format. It collects the 3D digital information in individual frame of motion.

Spatial and temporal features are passed into a Multi-layer perceptron  Neural  Network  (MLP).  The  system  cannot track non-manual features. To do this it needs more sensors to track facial expressions and body poses as a non-manual features.  Deep  learning  models  [16]  used  deep  layers architecture  with  the  iterative  nature.  They  used  CNN  to recognize the  fi ngerspelling  on American  Si gn  Language dataset. They used a dataset of 31 alphabets and numbers. The system was fed with depth maps for the data which was captured by depth sensor and digital camera. The system achieved  83.5%  to  85.5% accuracy. An  Italian Sign Language recognition system [17] was proposed a method using CNN. It used a dataset consists of 20 Italian gestures which  were  recorded  by  Microsoft  Kinect.  The  system consisted  of  two  CNNs;  one  for  hand  features  extraction and another for upper-body features extraction. The results then were concatenated to enter a classical Neural Network Classifi er.

## 2.1 Modern SL Sensors

Several works in SL recognition systems around the world utilized different sensors to deal with the input signs.Through  last  decade,  due  to  the  rapid  growing  in technology, many modifications are achieved to boost the accuracy of the sensors through the signs features capturing process.  Examples  of  these  sensors  are  Leap  motion  and Kinect sensors those capture the hands and

body poses. Figure 2 illustrates a sample of Kinect image and another of Leap.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 : Kinect versus Leap images. a) Image of Kinect. b) Image of Leap.

<!-- image -->

## 3. CONVOLUTIONAL NEURAL NETWORK (CNN)

The name of convolution neural network comes from the name of the mathematical convolution operation. CNN is designed to  using  in  image  classifi cation  and  recognition.  CNN  is mainly constructed from three main layers: convolution layer, pooling  layer  and  connected  layer.  The  famous  features  are edges  and  textures.  It  uses  a  kernel  or  filter  in  features extracting operation by applying convolution operation on the input image.

Lionel et al. [42] mentioned that, CCN is inspired by the visual cortex  of  human  brain.  In  CCN,  the  artificial  neurons  will connect to a local region of the visual area, called a receptive area. This is achieved by performing discrete convolutions on picture  with  values  as  trainable  weights.  Several  filters  are applied  for  each  channel  and  with  activation  functions  will form the feature map. The convolution process is followed by a  pooling  process.  Pooling  process  pool  only  the  interesting information of the feature maps. Therefore, CCN is a feature extraction model by deep learning algorithms. It very successful in case of object recognition. Many applications use CCNs as a core to achieve its job such as Google, Facebook and twitter.

In general, kernel is a two-dimensional array of values that will be considered  as weights.  The  convolution  operation  is performed by sliding the kernel over the image as shown in Figure 3. The convolution layer output is a map of features. Each region under  sliding and  convolution  process  is  called interested region (IR). The convolution process is achieved by using the following formula.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܫ is the input image, and ܭ is the kernel. The output of each layer in CNN can be expressed as following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where y is  the  layer  output, z is  the  activation  function, i is neuron in the layer , l w is the weight and x is the input data.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The second layer in the CCN is the pooling layer. The main purpose  of  this  layer  is  to  simplify  the  feature  map  coming from the convolution layer. It uses the max, sum or the average operation  in  emphasizing  the  feature.  The  third  layer  is  the fully  connected  layer.  The  main  purpose  of  this  layer  is  to convert the two-dimensional feature map to one-dimensional. This  form  is  suitable  for  pre-learned  feature  classification decision.

<!-- image -->

In our work, we used the dictionary for Arabic sign language [19]. We used the some gestures from dictionary as a ground truth in training stage of hand sign recognition. The dictionary is  released  as  groups  of  gestures'  pictures.  Each  group  of pictures represents a class of social situation. We select more than  40  gestures  achieved  by  one  hand  and  more  than  10 gestures  achieved  by  both  hands.  We  use  this  dataset  in training  CCN. The  system  was  tested  using  a  real  gestures achieved by our colleagues.

## 4. PROPOSED METHOD

In  this  section,  we  utilized  the  Kinect  technology.    The camera will capture frames for the gestures of deaf-mute person. Figure 4 show the sign Arabic Language alphabets le tters gestures; Figure 5 shows a sample of Arabic word gestures. The gestures images were processed by computer vision  segmentation  and  classification  techniques.  We modified the Fuzzy C-mean algorithm (FCM) for classification by incorporating prior information about the SL gestures shapes for Arabic language.  As a preprocess stage.

The proposed system was learned by prior information for the sign language gestures and its translation to the Arabic words. The learning system depends on three hidden layers of  Conventional  Neural  Network  (CNN).  We  built  an electronic library  contains  sign  language  gestures  and  its corresponding Arabic words in two different styles, written and  audio.  After  the  system  recognize  the  gesture,  it retrieves  its  translation  from  the  library.  The  proposed system  able  to  translate  from  Arabic  audio  word  to  sign language by recognizing the word and bringing its corresponding gesture from the library. The system starts when  the  Kinect  camera  captures  hands  gesture.  The Camera produces a real  time  stream  about  body  motion, object depth information, and skeletal motions.

A  computer  vison  framework  was  developed  to  detect hands and fingers. It segments and tracks them within its field of scope. The framework achieves movement -tracking information as a stream of frames. The tracked data frame contains  the  sign  orientations,  measured  positions  and other  information  about  each  object  detected  in  present frame. The  detected hand and  fi nger are represented  in a single  frame.  We  can  brief  our  strategy  by  the  following steps on still images.

Step-1: Capturing frames of gestures.

Step-2: Image denoising to refine the image appearance.

Step-3: Classification human skin using FCM

Step-4: Segmenting Signer face using CNN

Step-5: Segmenting hand gesture using CNN

Step-6: Classifying gestures using CNN.

Step-7: Recognizing gestures by comparing with items in the pre-built dataset.

Step-8: Retrieving the corresponding translation for the captured gesture.

## 4.1 Gesture Classification Based on FCM

In  this  system,  we  modify  the  standard  FCM  algorithm objective function to incorporate a priori information about the human skin color tone. The new objective function of the FCM has the following form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 2 ic i c d y v   and ( ) c w  is a term that is function of  representing  a  priori  information  on  human  skin  tone class's.

center c v and m ic u is  the  fuzzy  membership  with  tuning fuzziness m for the pixel i, i y is the data pixel value. N the number of frame pixel. Finally, Nc is the number of classes. The  constraint  on  the  membership u is  typical  the  sum overall classes equal one:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As we illustrated in [18], we assume that the typical and often logical Gaussian distribution for the class centers. So ܹ takes the form of the reciprocal Gaussian probability density function for the class's center as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where   ( ) , c c c w u    is the Gaussian parameters: c u is the mean value of the class centers and c  is their standard deviation.

Figure 4: Example for Arabic SL letters

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- image -->

Cat

Figure 5: Examples for Arabic SL words

## 5. RESULTS

In this paper, we developed a fuzzy framework for segmenting,  classifying  and  recognizing  the  Arabic  deaf gestures.  A  pre-learned  gesture  database  was  constructed using machine learning algorithm depending on conventional neural network (CNN). The Arabic gestures are automatically detected and recognized. We built and evaluated our proposed framework and its performance on a machine with specifications, Core i3, 4 GB RAM, Windows 10 with 64 bit, and Matlab 2015. Our database contains 20 images for Arabic SL words and images for all Arabic SL letters. Half of the gestures  in  our  database  was  used  in  training  stage  and  the other half was used in testing stage.

We ran several  experiments  to reach  the  best  performance. Through each experiment, we tried to tune the  CCN parameters such as learning rate, decay and momentum.  The input images have different depths and different occlusions. Unfortunately, there are not any standard database for Arabic SL gestures. Therefore, we could not compare our proposed performance with state of arts. Some of our developed system results on Arabic words are listed table 1 and some selected letters results are listed in table 2.

In  table  1,  we  can note the low  performance  of  recognition rate  of  the  words  duck  and  cat.  We  attributed  this  to  the complex  of  gestures  of  duck  and  cat.  While,  duck  gesture needs to adjust the capturing angle to emphasize the fingers details,  the  cat  gesture  needs  more  than  one  frame  to  give details  about  hand  movement.    In  table  2,  we  note  that recognition rate of the letters ( ج ) and ( ) خ is  less than rate of letter ( ح ). This is attributed to the small details in outer and insider  edges.  These  small details are  canceled through any morphological operation. The same situation is for the couple letters ( د ) and ( ذ ), the couple letters ( ص ) and ( ض ), and couple letters ( ف ) and ( ق ).

Table 1: Samples of Arabic SL words

| Arabic word   | English meaning   |   Results |
|---------------|-------------------|-----------|
| ﺷﺠﺮة          | Tree              |     94.37 |
| ھﺎﺗﻒ          | Telephone         |     88.61 |
| ﺑﻄﺔ           | Duck              |     76.42 |
| ﻗﻄﺔ           | Cat               |     68.83 |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Table 2: Samples of Arabic SL letters

| Arabic Characters   | gestures   |   Results |
|---------------------|------------|-----------|
| أ                   |            |     95.21 |
| ب                   |            |     95.74 |
| ج                   |            |     84.71 |
| ح                   |            |     86.35 |
| خ                   |            |     84.22 |
| د                   |            |     87.42 |
| ذ                   |            |     86.33 |
| ص                   |            |     88.23 |
| ض                   |            |     86.06 |
| ف                   |            |     85.45 |
| ق                   |            |     87.14 |

## 6. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS

In this research, an efficient system for Arabic Sign Language Recognition  with  Kinect  information  was  developed.  The system uses the shape and depth information for the gesture as input. The architecture extracts spatial-temporal features from the input. The gestures are classified and segmented from the background.  Then,  the  hands  are  tracking  in  pre-defined number  of  frames.  The  gesture  is  recognized  by  matching with the corresponding translation in the dataset. Finally, the retrieving  process  achieves  the  conversion  between  gesture and its corresponding spoken word. The system achieves an accuracy rate greater than 90%.

This  accuracy  can  be  boosted  with  more  training  samples added to the dataset to overcome the variety of the signer and the environment surrounded. The lack of standard datasets or a  benchmark  dataset  on  SL  for  Arabic  language  makes  it difficult to compare our results with other works. As a future work, we tend to incorporate several vocabularies. In addition, hand tracking and segmentation canbe enhanced to overcome occlusion  of  the  hand.  Information  about  other  body  parts. such as the arms and more facial expressions can be included to  boosrecognition  accuracy.  Finally,  we  tend  to  achieve  a real-time prototype version.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The  author gratefully acknowledges Qassim  University, represented  by  the  Deanship  of  Scientific  Research  on  the material  support  for  this  research  under  the  number  (3769) during the academic year 1439 AH/ 2018 AD

## REFERENCES

1. Oya. A, Isamail A. Ari, LaleA. ,Bulant S., Alexandre B. Alice C., Pavel C. Ana H., Francios F., " SignTutor: An Interactive System for  Sign  Language  Tutoring " MultiMedia, IEEE , Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 81-93, January-March 2009.
2. K. Imagawa, S. Lu, S. Igi, " Color-based hands tracking system for sign language recognition ," Automatic Face and Gesture  Recognition. Proceedings. Third  IEEE International  Conference,  Vol.,  No.,  pp.  462-467,  April 1998.
3. M.  S.  M.  Asaari  and  S.  A.  Suandi,  '' Hand  gesture tracking  system  using  adaptive  Kalman  filter '', in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. Design Appl., Nov./Dec., pp. 166-171, 2010.
4. E.-J. Holden, G. Lee, R. Owens, " Automatic Recognition of Colloquial Australian Sign Language ," Application of Computer Vision, 2005. WACV/MOTIONS '05 Volume 1. Seventh IEEE Workshops, Vol. 2, No. , pp. 183188, January 2005.
5. G. Awad, J. Han, and A. Sutherland, ' A Unified System for Segmentation and Tracking of Face and Hands in Sign Language Recognition ', 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2006 (ICPR), Vol. 1, pp. 239-242, IEEE, 2006.
6. S. Hadfield and R. Bowden, ' Generalized pose estimation  using  depth ',  in  Trends  and  Topics  in Computer Vision, London, Springer, pp. 312-325, 2012.
7. D. Uebersax, J. Gall, M. Van den Bergh and L. Van Gool, " Real-time sign language letter and word recognition from  depth  data " Computer  Vision  Workshops  (ICCV Workshops), 2011 IEEE International Conference, Vol., No., pp. 383-390, November 2011.
8. P. Doliotis, A. Stefan, C. McMurrough, D. Eckhard and V. Athitsos, ' Comparing gesture recognition accuracy using  color  and  depth  information ',  Proceedings  of

- the 4th International Conference on PErvasive Technologies  Related  to  Assistive  Environments,  pp. 20:1-20:7, New York, ACM, 2011.
9. Mahmoud M. El-Gayyar, Amira S. Ibrahim, M.E. Wahed " Translation  from  Arabic  speech  to  Arabic  Sign Language based on cloud computing ", Egyptian Informatics Journal, 17, 295-303, 2016.
10. Nada B. Ibrahim ,Mazen M. Selim, Hala H. Zayed " An Automatic Arabic Sign Language Recognition System (ArSLRS) ", Journal of King Saud University -Computer and Information Sciences 30, 470-477, (2018).
11. AmitkumarShinde , Ramesh Kagalkar " Sign Language to Text and Vice Versa Recognition using Computer Vision in Marathi ", International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 - 8887)
12. Amruta  L.  Kabade,  Dr.V.G.  Sangam  " Canny  edge detection algorithm", International Journal of Advanced  Research in  Electronics  and  Communication Engineering (IJARECE) Volume 5, Issue 5, May 2016.
13. Marek Hr ْ ◌ z · Pavel Campr · ErinçDikici · Ahmet Alp K ı nd ı roglu " Automatic fingersign-to-speech translation system ", J Multimodal User Interfaces 4:61-79, 2011
14. Allen J, Xu R, Jin J, ' Object tracking using camshift algorithm and multiple quantized feature spaces '. In: Proceedings of the Pan-Sydney area workshop on visual information  processing,  vol  36.  Australian  Computer Society, Inc, pp 3-7, 2004.
15. B. Kang, S. Tripathi and T. Q. Nguyen, " Real-time Sign Language Fingempelling Recognition using Convolutional Neural Networks from Depth map ," in arXiv: 50903001. 2015.
16. L. Pigou. S. Dieleman, P.-J. Kindermans  and B. Sehrauwen, ' Sign Language Recognition Using Convolutional Neural Networks ,' in Computer Vision ECCV 2014 Workshops, 2014.
17. Garcia, Brandon  and  Viesca,  Sigberto.,  ' Real-time American Sign Language Recognition with Convolutional Neural Networks ', In Convoiurionai Neural  Networks  for  Visnai  Recognition  at  Stanford University, 2016.
18. Moumen El-Melegy, Hashim Mokhtar. " Incorporating prior information in the fuzzy C-mean algorithm with application  to  brain  tissues  segmentation  in  MRI ", 16th IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), 2009.
19. http://www.menasy.com/arab%20Dictionary%20for%20 the%20deaf%202.pdf
20. Fang  G,  Gao  W,  Zhao  D,  ' Large  vocabulary  sign language  recognition  based  on  fuzzy  decision  trees . IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern Part ASyst Hum 34(3):305-314, 2004
21. Fels SS,  Hinton  GE  (1993)  Glove-talk,  ' A  neural network interface between a data-glove and a speech synthesizer ', IEEE Trans Neural Netw 4(1):2-8
22. Kong W, Ranganath S.,' Signing exact english', modeling and recognition. Pattern Recognit 41(5):1638-1652, 2008
23. Murakami K, Taguchi H., ' Gesture recognition using recurrent  neural  networks ', In:  Proceedings  of  the SIGCHI  conference  on  human  factors  in  computing systems. ACM, pp 237-242, 1991
24. Chen F, Fu CM, Huang CL, ' Hand gesture recognition using a real-time tracking method and hidden Markov  models ', Image  Vis  Comput  21(8):745-758, 2003
25. Zaki MM,  ShaheenSI.,' Sign language recognition using a combination of new vision based features ', Pattern Recognit Lett 32(4):572-577, 2011
26. Assan  M,  Grobel  K.  ' Video-based  sign  language recognition using hidden markov models ', In: International gesture workshop. Springer, pp 97-109
27. Starner T, Pentland A.,  ' Real-time american  sign language recognition from video using hidden markov models', In: Motion-based recognition. Springer, pp 227-243, 1997
28. Wang RY, Popovic J.,' Real-time hand-tracking with a color glove ', In: ACM transactions on graphics (TOG), vol 28. ACM, p 63, 2009
29. Zhang Z, Huang F., ' Hand tracking algorithm based on superpixels feature ', In: 2013 international conference on information science and cloud computing companion (ISCC-C). IEEE, pp 629-634, 2013
30. Zou  X,  Wang  H,  Zhang  Q.,  ' Hand  gesture  target model  updating  and  result forecasting  algorithm based on mean shift ', J Multimed 8(1):1-8, 2013
31. Jeyakar J, Babu RV, Ramakrishnan K., ' Robust object tracking  with  background-weighted  local  kernels '. Comput Vis Image Underst 112(3):296-309, 2008
32. Nadgeri  SM,  Sawarkar  S,  Gawande  AD., '  Hand gesture recognition using camshift  algorithm ', In: 2010 3rd international conference on emerging trends in engineering and technology (ICETET). IEEE, pp 37-41 , 2010
33. Kian M., Alan W., Chin P., Shing C., " Isolated  sign language recognition using Convolutional Neural Network hand modelling and Hand Energy Image ", Multimedia  Tools  and  Applications,  78:19917-19944., 2019
34. Chen S., ' Kalman filter for robot vision: a survey', IEEE  Trans  Ind  Electron  59(11):4409-4420, 2012
35. Prince  SJ.  ' Computer  vision:  models,  learning,  and inference ', Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 2012
36. Ross  DA,  Lim  J,  Lin  RS,  Yang  MH.,  ' Incremental learning for robust visual tracking ', Int J Comput Vis 77(1-3):125-141, 2008
37. Wang D, Lu H, Yang MH., ' Online  object  tracking with  sparse  prototypes ', IEEE  Trans  Image  Process 22(1):314-325, 2013
38. Zhong W, Lu H, Yang MH., ' Robust object tracking via sparsity-based  collaborative  model ', In:  2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR). IEEE, pp 1838-1845, 2012
39. Zhou SK, Chellappa R, Moghaddam  B., ' Visual tracking and recognition  using  appearance-adaptive

- models in particle filters ', IEEE Trans Image Process 13(11):1491-1506, 2004
40. Shan  C,  Tan  T,  Wei  Y.,  ' Real-time  hand  tracking using a mean shift embedded particle filter ', Pattern Recognit 40(7):1958-1970, 2007
41. Morshidi  M,  Tjahjadi  T.,  ' Gravity  optimised  particle filter for hand tracking ', Pattern Recognit 47(1):194-207, 2014
42. Lionel P., Sander D., Pieter K., and Benjamin S., " Sign Language  Recognition  Using  Convolutional  Neural Networks ", ECCV 2014 Workshops, Part I, LNCS 8925, pp. 572-578, 2015 .
43. H. Almohamedh , S. Almotairi, ' Facial Emotion Recognition Using Eigenface and Feature Optimization' , International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, Volume 8, No. 4, July-August 2019 .
44. J.Sutopo,  M.Khanapi,  M.A.Burhanuddin,  Zulhawati1, ' Gesture Recognition of Dance using Chain Code and Hidden  Markov  Model ', International  Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, Volume 8, No. 6,Noveber-December  2019.
45. M. Sardeshmukh1, V.Sardeshmukh, ' Performance Analysis of Human  Detection and Tracking in Changing Illumination ', International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, Volume 8, No. 6,Noveber-December  2019.
46. J.  Robert,  B.  Del  Rosario,  ' Development  of  a  Face Recognition System Using Deep Convolutional Neural Network in a Multi-view Vision Environment ', International Journal of Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering, Volume 8, No3, May-June  2019.

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: none
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: pdf
- bibtex: semanticscholar
