---
semanticScholarId: "0244d2e233c633ae81a062cda0bd9b91b6dfe73c"
bibKey: null
year: 2020
title: "“Switching caps”"
doi: "10.1075/aplv.19010.ree"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["History", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# “Switching caps”

**Year:** [[2020]]
**Topics:** [[topics/history|History]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Lauren W. Reed

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0244d2e233c633ae81a062cda0bd9b91b6dfe73c)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1075/aplv.19010.ree)

## Abstract

Abstract Abstract (Australian Sign Language) Most bilingualism and translanguaging studies focus on spoken language; less is known about how people use two or more ways of signing. Here, I take steps towards redressing this imbalance, presenting a case study of signed language in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea. The study’s methodology is participant observation and analysis of conversational recordings between deaf signers. The Port Moresby deaf community uses two ways of signing: sign language and culture. sign language is around 30 years old, and its lexicon is drawn largely from Australasian Signed English. In contrast, culture – which is as old as each individual user – is characterised by signs of local origin, abundant depiction, and considerable individual variation. Despite sign language’s young age, its users have innovated a metalinguistic sign (switch-caps) to describe switching between ways of communicating. To conclude, I discuss how the Port Moresby situation challenges both the bilingualism and translanguaging approaches.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Inproceedings{Reed2020SwitchingC,
 author = {Lauren W. Reed},
 pages = {13-52},
 title = {“Switching caps”},
 volume = {6},
 year = {2020}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
