---
semanticScholarId: "0281d1d07ee328b316066844a6e8face366bc10e"
bibKey: null
year: 2022
title: "Kinetic Art Drawings with ‘Aum’ (aumkara series) by Narendra Srivastava"
doi: "10.21659/cjad.62.v6n203"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: false
expanded: false
topics: ["Art"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Kinetic Art Drawings with ‘Aum’ (aumkara series) by Narendra Srivastava

**Year:** [[2022]]
**Topics:** [[topics/art|Art]]
**Authors:** Meenakshi Thakur

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0281d1d07ee328b316066844a6e8face366bc10e)
- [PDF](https://chitrolekha.com/ns/v6n2/v6n203.pdf)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.21659/cjad.62.v6n203)

## Abstract

The earliest pieces of evidence of human ability to communicate and desire to create are represented by symbols, hieroglyphics and sign language. OM’ is the root syllable of origination and dissolution, Bija’ of all mantras. Yet, it is significant to value the differences in form and expression of OM according to each culture. It is important to observe different forms of OM as independent, individual forms, and yet not just variations of OM after appreciating the difference in thinking, sense of beauty, and artistic creativity, you may envelop them in the profound meaning of OM again by seeing Narendra’s kinetic art drawings of OM. His chronicle as a graphic artist and a creative painter is awe-inspiring; he is one of the earliest artists to use typographical designs in his paintings. He adopted the geometrical forms of kinetic art and introduced the sacred symbol OM in different geometrical forms. And the result was a genuine blend of the art of East and West obsessed with ‘OM’. His “Om” series of drawings is the highlight of his career. His drawings are a broader form of kinetic art.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Thakur2022KineticAD,
 author = {Meenakshi Thakur},
 booktitle = {The Chitrolekha Journal on Art and Design},
 journal = {Chitrolekha Journal on Art and Design},
 title = {Kinetic Art Drawings with ‘Aum’ (aumkara series) by Narendra Srivastava},
 year = {2022}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
