---
semanticScholarId: "0296ee2a388f553432428dc2cc2a66aa00825086"
bibKey: null
year: 2021
title: "REFLEXÕES SOBRE ATIVIDADE DE LÍNGUA PORTUGUESA ESCRITA PARA ALUNOS SURDOS"
doi: "10.4013/ENTR.2019.131.02"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: false
expanded: false
topics: ["Education", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# REFLEXÕES SOBRE ATIVIDADE DE LÍNGUA PORTUGUESA ESCRITA PARA ALUNOS SURDOS

**Year:** [[2021]]
**Topics:** [[topics/education|Education]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Daiana Steyer; Cátia de Azevedo Fronza

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0296ee2a388f553432428dc2cc2a66aa00825086)
- [PDF](https://doi.org/10.4013/entr.2019.131.02)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.4013/ENTR.2019.131.02)

## Abstract

The purpose of this study is to think about reading and written activities of Portuguese as a second language in the first years of Elementary School, from a school for deaf children in the metropolitan region of Porto Alegre, Brazil. To perform this analysis, data from the research “Oral and Sign Languages: Challenges and Potential in Deaf Education”, coordinated by Professor Profa. Dra. Cátia de Azevedo Fronza, at Unisinos, was used. For the present study, it was selected a moment when the written Portuguese language was worked with, in 2015, at 4th and 5th Elementary School groups. The data was collected by the research group, through photos, videos. Considering the comparison between the theory, Quadros e Schmiedt (2006), Fernandes (2006), Karnopp e Pereira (2009), Muck (2009) and the analyzed activity, it is observed that the educational context is organized in a way that interactions are performed through orality. This situation makes deaf students in disadvantage in relation to the articulation of knowledge in classroom.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Inproceedings{Steyer2021REFLEXÕESSA,
 author = {Daiana Steyer and Cátia de Azevedo Fronza},
 pages = {23-39},
 title = {REFLEXÕES SOBRE ATIVIDADE DE LÍNGUA PORTUGUESA ESCRITA PARA ALUNOS SURDOS},
 volume = {13},
 year = {2021}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
