---
semanticScholarId: "02c1fe6dc28f77f6aef3633cfbfef38a568e4077"
bibKey: null
year: 2018
title: "The Comparison of Some Hidden Markov Models for Sign Language Recognition"
doi: "10.1109/INAPR.2018.8627031"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# The Comparison of Some Hidden Markov Models for Sign Language Recognition

**Year:** [[2018]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Suharjito; Narada Thiracitta; Herman Gunawan; G. Witjaksono

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02c1fe6dc28f77f6aef3633cfbfef38a568e4077)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/INAPR.2018.8627031)

## Abstract

Sign language is one of the most popular communication technique. While it is popular, most people don't know how to use it. The problem lies in the difficulty of how many signs there to be memorized. That's why Sign Language Recognition (SLR) is needed. Sign Language Recognition (SLR) is a very interesting area for some researcher because of the complexity of its problem especially using video-based recognition of complex sign language. That's why Sign Language Recognition (SLR) has been developed for a long time. Unfortunately, every research about Sign Language Recognition has its own limitation. Some research got low accuracy, too expensive, insufficient dataset, and many other else. Every researcher also has their own way of doing a thing but usually, the pattern in Sign Language Recognition (SLR) are dataset collection, preprocessing data, feature extraction, training, and classification. For the dataset, we will use Argentina Sign Language that provides data as video. After that, we need to preprocess it using edge detection and skin detection using the help of Contrast Adaptive Histogram Equalization (CLAHE) for image enhancement. Then we will extract its feature by its movement. At last, we will train and classify the data using some modified Hidden Markov Model. In this research, we get an accuracy of 83% by classifying 10 signs using Gaussian Hidden Markov Model (Gaussian HMM) and 72% by classifying 10 signs using Multinomial Hidden Markov Model (Multinomial HMM).

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Conference{Suharjito2018TheCO,
 author = {Suharjito and Narada Thiracitta and Herman Gunawan and G. Witjaksono},
 booktitle = {2018 Indonesian Association for Pattern Recognition International Conference (INAPR)},
 journal = {2018 Indonesian Association for Pattern Recognition International Conference (INAPR)},
 pages = {6-10},
 title = {The Comparison of Some Hidden Markov Models for Sign Language Recognition},
 year = {2018}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
