---
semanticScholarId: "02c638a2109fd7bbd586fbcf34879eb2d37760fb"
bibKey: null
year: 2025
title: "Signs of Contact"
doi: "10.1163/19552629-bja10093"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Signs of Contact

**Year:** [[2025]]
**Topics:** [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** E. Prażmo

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02c638a2109fd7bbd586fbcf34879eb2d37760fb)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1163/19552629-bja10093)

## Abstract


 This paper provides an overview of contact-induced influences that Polish exerts on Polish Sign Language (PJM). It investigates strategies such as mouthing and fingerspelling as well as lexemes, including loan signs, initialized signs and signs originating from semantic translations of and phonetic analogy. Mouthing is the voiceless articulation of Polish words while signing, whereas fingerspelling uses a manual alphabet for transliterating words. Both strategies help disambiguate polysemy and express concepts lacking dedicated signs. Moreover, fingerspelled words can be reduced to loan signs. Initialized signs incorporate initial letters of Polish words through manual letter handshapes. Semantic translation involves borrowing a word’s meaning and expressing it with an equivalent sign. In contrast, phonetic analogues occur when a single sign represents two semantically unrelated concepts due to their phonetic similarity in Polish. This study is framed in the context of translanguaging and semiotic repertoires research, but also a broader field of linguistic multimodality.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Prażmo2025SignsOC,
 author = {E. Prażmo},
 booktitle = {Journal of Language Contact},
 journal = {Journal of Language Contact},
 title = {Signs of Contact},
 year = {2025}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
