---
semanticScholarId: "031ec115460060f0b6776d3e86ce5f44515c3259"
bibKey: null
year: 2023
title: "BDSL 49: A comprehensive dataset of Bangla sign language"
doi: "10.1016/j.dib.2023.109329"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Medicine", "Linguistics", "Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# BDSL 49: A comprehensive dataset of Bangla sign language

**Year:** [[2023]]
**Topics:** [[topics/medicine|Medicine]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]], [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Ayman Hasib; Jannatul Ferdous Eva; Saqib Sizan Khan; Mst. Nipa Khatun; Ashraful Haque; Nishat Shahrin; R. Rahman; Hasan Murad; Md. Rajibul Islam; Molla Rashied Hussein

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/031ec115460060f0b6776d3e86ce5f44515c3259)
- [PDF](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2023.109329)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2023.109329)

## Abstract

Language is a method by which individuals express their thoughts. Each language has its own alphabet and numbers. Oral and written communication are both effective means of human interaction. However, each language has a sign language equivalent. Hearing-impaired and/or nonverbal individuals communicate through sign language. BDSL is the abbreviation for the Bangla sign language. The dataset contains images of hand signs in Bangla. The collection comprises 49 individual sign language images of the Bengali alphabet. BDSL49 is a set of 29,490 images with 49 labels. During data collection, images of fourteen distinct adults, each with a unique appearance and context, were captured. During data preparation, numerous strategies have been utilized to reduce noise. This dataset is available for free to researchers. Using techniques such as machine learning, computer vision, and deep learning, they are able to develop automated systems. Moreover, two models were applied to this dataset. The first is for detection, and the second is for identification.

## TL;DR

This dataset contains images of hand signs in Bangla, the abbreviation for the Bangla sign language, which comprises 49 individual sign language images of the Bengali alphabet.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Hasib2023BDSL4A,
 author = {Ayman Hasib and Jannatul Ferdous Eva and Saqib Sizan Khan and Mst. Nipa Khatun and Ashraful Haque and Nishat Shahrin and R. Rahman and Hasan Murad and Md. Rajibul Islam and Molla Rashied Hussein},
 booktitle = {Data in Brief},
 journal = {Data in Brief},
 title = {BDSL 49: A comprehensive dataset of Bangla sign language},
 volume = {49},
 year = {2023}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
