---
semanticScholarId: "034b723671b5e2f8d22d48ac16f988795c0aa4cd"
bibKey: null
year: 2022
title: "Word separation in continuous sign language using isolated signs and post-processing"
doi: "10.48550/arXiv.2204.00923"
arxivId: "2204.00923"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Word separation in continuous sign language using isolated signs and post-processing

**Year:** [[2022]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** R. Rastgoo; Kourosh Kiani; Sergio Escalera

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/034b723671b5e2f8d22d48ac16f988795c0aa4cd)
- [PDF](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2204.00923)
- [arXiv:2204.00923](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.00923)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.00923)

## Abstract

. Continuous Sign Language Recognition (CSLR) is a long challenging task in Computer Vision due to the difficulties in detecting the explicit boundaries between the words in a sign sentence. To deal with this challenge, we propose a two-stage model. In the first stage, the predictor model, which includes a combination of CNN, SVD, and LSTM, is trained with the isolated signs. In the second stage, we apply a post-processing algorithm to the Softmax outputs obtained from the first part of the model in order to separate the isolated signs in the continuous signs. While the proposed model is trained on the isolated sign classes with similar frame numbers, it is evaluated on the continuous sign videos with a different frame length per each isolated sign class. Due to the lack of a large dataset, including both the sign sequences and the corresponding isolated signs, two public datasets in Isolated Sign Language Recognition (ISLR), RKS-PERSIANSIGN and ASLLVD, are used for evaluation. Results of the continuous sign videos confirm the efficiency of the proposed model to deal with isolated sign boundaries detection.

## TL;DR

A two-stage model to deal with isolated sign boundaries detection is proposed, which includes a combination of CNN, SVD, and LSTM and applies a post-processing algorithm to the Softmax outputs obtained from the first part in order to separate the isolated signs in the continuous signs.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Rastgoo2022WordSI,
 author = {R. Rastgoo and Kourosh Kiani and Sergio Escalera},
 booktitle = {Expert systems with applications},
 journal = {ArXiv},
 title = {Word separation in continuous sign language using isolated signs and post-processing},
 volume = {abs/2204.00923},
 year = {2022}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
