---
semanticScholarId: "130cd2930ac571b5cf5566e1a23dd3e0e06d2ef5"
bibKey: null
year: 2024
title: "Exploring Latent Sign Language Representations with Isolated Signs, Sentences and In-the-Wild Data"
doi: "10.63317/3mbacm3mk4iq"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Exploring Latent Sign Language Representations with Isolated Signs, Sentences and In-the-Wild Data

**Year:** [[2024]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Fredrik Malmberg; Anna Klezovich; Johanna Mesch; Jonas Beskow

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/130cd2930ac571b5cf5566e1a23dd3e0e06d2ef5)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.63317/3mbacm3mk4iq)
- [ACL Anthology](https://aclanthology.org/2024.signlang-1.24)

## Abstract

Unsupervised representation learning offers a promising way of utilising large unannotated sign language resources found on the Internet. In this paper, a representation learning model, VQ-VAE, is trained to learn a codebook of motion primitives from sign language data. For training, we use isolated signs and sentences from a sign language dictionary. Three models are trained: one on isolated signs, one on sentences, and one mixed model. We test these models by comparing how well they are able to reconstruct held-out data from the dictionary, as well as an in-the-wild dataset based on sign language videos from YouTube. These data are characterized by less formal and more expressive signing than the dictionary items. Results show that the isolated sign model yields considerably higher reconstruction loss for the YouTube dataset, while the sentence model performs the best on this data. Further, an analysis of codebook usage reveals that the set of codes used by isolated signs and sentences differ significantly. In order to further understand the different characters of the datasets, we carry out an analysis of the velocity profiles, which reveals that signing data in-the-wild has a much higher average velocity than dictionary signs and sentences. We believe these differences also explain the large differences in reconstruction loss observed.

## TL;DR

An analysis of the velocity profiles reveals that signing data in-the-wild has a much higher average velocity than dictionary signs and sentences, and believes these differences also explain the large differences in reconstruction loss observed.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Malmberg2024ExploringLS,
 author = {Fredrik Malmberg and Anna Klezovich and Johanna Mesch and Jonas Beskow},
 booktitle = {SIGNLANG},
 journal = {Proceedings of the LREC-COLING 2024 11th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Evaluation of Sign Language Resources},
 title = {Exploring Latent Sign Language Representations with Isolated Signs, Sentences and In-the-Wild Data},
 year = {2024}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
