---
semanticScholarId: "1f3cea63caa1c773f8e1676967271dac4166b4c7"
bibKey: "petrovich2022TEMOSGeneratingDiverse"
year: 2022
title: "TEMOS: Generating diverse human motions from textual descriptions"
doi: "10.48550/arXiv.2204.14109"
arxivId: "2204.14109"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: ours
---

# TEMOS: Generating diverse human motions from textual descriptions

**Year:** [[2022]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Mathis Petrovich; Michael J. Black; Gul Varol

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f3cea63caa1c773f8e1676967271dac4166b4c7)
- [PDF](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2204.14109)
- [arXiv:2204.14109](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.14109)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.14109)

## Abstract

We address the problem of generating diverse 3D human motions from textual descriptions. This challenging task requires joint modeling of both modalities: understanding and extracting useful human-centric information from the text, and then generating plausible and realistic sequences of human poses. In contrast to most previous work which focuses on generating a single, deterministic, motion from a textual description, we design a variational approach that can produce multiple diverse human motions. We propose TEMOS, a text-conditioned generative model leveraging variational autoencoder (VAE) training with human motion data, in combination with a text encoder that produces distribution parameters compatible with the VAE latent space. We show the TEMOS framework can produce both skeleton-based animations as in prior work, as well more expressive SMPL body motions. We evaluate our approach on the KIT Motion-Language benchmark and, despite being relatively straightforward, demonstrate significant improvements over the state of the art. Code and models are available on our webpage.

## TL;DR

TEMOS, a text-conditioned generative model leveraging variational autoencoder (VAE) training with human motion data, in combination with a text encoder that produces distribution parameters compatible with the VAE latent space is proposed.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{petrovich2022TEMOSGeneratingDiverse,
 address = {Cham},
 author = {Petrovich, Mathis and Black, Michael J. and Varol, G{\"u}l},
 booktitle = {Computer {{Vision}} -- {{ECCV}} 2022},
 doi = {10.1007/978-3-031-20047-2_28},
 editor = {Avidan, Shai and Brostow, Gabriel and Ciss{\'e}, Moustapha and Farinella, Giovanni Maria and Hassner, Tal},
 isbn = {978-3-031-20047-2},
 langid = {english},
 pages = {480--497},
 publisher = {Springer Nature Switzerland},
 title = {{{TEMOS}}: Generating Diverse Human Motions from Textual Descriptions},
 year = {2022}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: ours
