---
semanticScholarId: "2ddcdecc162c35b404697c76c3516d93eb105ada"
bibKey: "imashev-etal-2024-retrospective"
year: 2024
title: "Retrospective of Kazakh-Russian Sign Language Corpus Formation"
doi: "10.63317/4mebvh4fp43n"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Linguistics", "Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: ours
---

# Retrospective of Kazakh-Russian Sign Language Corpus Formation

**Year:** [[2024]]
**Topics:** [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]], [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** A. Imashev; A. Kydyrbekova; Medet Mukushev; A. Sandygulova; Shynggys Islam; Khassan Israilov; Aibek Makazhanov; Zhandos Yessenbayev

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ddcdecc162c35b404697c76c3516d93eb105ada)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.63317/4mebvh4fp43n)
- [ACL Anthology](https://aclanthology.org/2024.signlang-1.12)

## Abstract

Sign language (SL) is a mode of communication that, in most cases, relies on visual perception exclusively and uses the visual-gestural modality. The advent of machine learning techniques has expanded the range of potential applications, not only in industry but also in addressing societal needs. Previous research has already demonstrated encouraging outcomes in developing sign language recognition systems that are both quite accurate and resilient. Nevertheless, the effectiveness and use of algorithms are impacted not only by their accessibility but also, at times to a greater extent, by the presence of substantial quantities of pertinent data. At the start of the local sign language corpus collection in 2015, there was a notable deficit of local Kazakh-Russian Sign Language data available for computer vision and machine-learning tasks. There were already corpora of another lexically close language, Russian Sign Language, but they were aimed at and tailored for lingustic research. We initiated the procedure by collecting data appropriate for machine-learning purposes. The subsets have been incorporated into the principal corpus and will be subject to future enhancements and refinements. This paper provides an overview of the collected components of the Kazakh-Russian Sign Language Corpus and the resulting outcomes derived from them.

## TL;DR

An overview of the collected components of the Kazakh-Russian Sign Language Corpus and the resulting outcomes derived from them is provided.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{imashev-etal-2024-retrospective,
 address = {Torino, Italia},
 author = {Imashev, Alfarabi  and
Kydyrbekova, Aigerim  and
Mukushev, Medet  and
Sandygulova, Anara  and
Islam, Shynggys  and
Israilov, Khassan  and
Makazhanov, Aibek  and
Yessenbayev, Zhandos},
 booktitle = {Proceedings of the LREC-COLING 2024 11th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Evaluation of Sign Language Resources},
 editor = {Efthimiou, Eleni  and
Fotinea, Stavroula-Evita  and
Hanke, Thomas  and
Hochgesang, Julie A.  and
Mesch, Johanna  and
Schulder, Marc},
 pages = {111--122},
 publisher = {ELRA and ICCL},
 title = {Retrospective of {K}azakh-{R}ussian {S}ign {L}anguage Corpus Formation},
 url = {https://aclanthology.org/2024.signlang-1.12},
 year = {2024}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: ours
