---
semanticScholarId: "3acdaa62dbd16b844966ae412c832be151c257ba"
bibKey: "muller-etal-2023-considerations"
year: 2022
title: "Considerations for meaningful sign language machine translation based on glosses"
doi: "10.48550/arXiv.2211.15464"
arxivId: "2211.15464"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "ar5iv"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: ar5iv
  bibtex: ours
---

# Considerations for meaningful sign language machine translation based on glosses

**Year:** [[2022]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Mathias Muller; Zifan Jiang; Amit Moryossef; Annette Rios Gonzales; Sarah Ebling

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3acdaa62dbd16b844966ae412c832be151c257ba)
- [PDF](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.15464)
- [arXiv:2211.15464](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.15464)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.15464)
- [ACL Anthology](https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.60)

## Abstract

Automatic sign language processing is gaining popularity in Natural Language Processing (NLP) research (Yin et al., 2021). In machine translation (MT) in particular, sign language translation based on glosses is a prominent approach. In this paper, we review recent works on neural gloss translation. We find that limitations of glosses in general and limitations of specific datasets are not discussed in a transparent manner and that there is no common standard for evaluation.To address these issues, we put forward concrete recommendations for future research on gloss translation. Our suggestions advocate awareness of the inherent limitations of gloss-based approaches, realistic datasets, stronger baselines and convincing evaluation.

## TL;DR

This paper reviews recent works on neural gloss translation and makes concrete recommendations for future research on gloss translation, including awareness of the inherent limitations of gloss-based approaches, realistic datasets, stronger baselines and convincing evaluation.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{muller-etal-2023-considerations,
 address = {Toronto, Canada},
 author = {M{\"u}ller, Mathias  and
Jiang, Zifan  and
Moryossef, Amit  and
Rios, Annette  and
Ebling, Sarah},
 booktitle = {Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers)},
 doi = {10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.60},
 editor = {Rogers, Anna  and
Boyd-Graber, Jordan  and
Okazaki, Naoaki},
 pages = {682--693},
 publisher = {Association for Computational Linguistics},
 title = {Considerations for meaningful sign language machine translation based on glosses},
 url = {https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-short.60},
 year = {2023}
}
```

## Full Text

# Considerations for meaningful sign language machine translation based on glosses

Mathias Müller 1 , Zifan Jiang 1 , Amit Moryossef 1,2,3 , Annette Rios 1 and Sarah Ebling 1 1 Department of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich, Switzerland 2 ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 3 Bar-Ilan University, Tel Aviv, Israel {mmueller,jiang,rios,ebling}@cl.uzh.ch , amitmoryossef@gmail.com

###### Abstract

Automatic sign language processing is gaining popularity in Natural Language Processing (NLP) research (Yin et al., [2021](#bib.bib38) ) . In machine translation (MT) in particular, sign language translation based on glosses is a prominent approach.

In this paper, we review recent works on neural gloss translation. We find that limitations of glosses in general and limitations of specific datasets are not discussed in a transparent manner and that there is no common standard for evaluation.

To address these issues, we put forward concrete recommendations for future research on gloss translation. Our suggestions advocate awareness of the inherent limitations of gloss-based approaches, realistic datasets, stronger baselines and convincing evaluation.

## 1 Introduction

Automatic sign language processing is becoming more popular in Natural Language Processing (NLP) research (Yin et al., [2021](#bib.bib38) ) . In machine translation (MT) in particular, many recent publications have proposed sign language translation based on glosses . Glosses provide semantic labels for individual signs. They typically consist of the base form of a word in the surrounding spoken language written in capital letters (see Table [1](#S1.T1) ).

Even though glosses are not a complete representation of signs (see e.g. Pizzuto et al.

[2006](#bib.bib28) ), they are often adopted in MT because, by virtue of being textual, they fit seamlessly into existing MT pipelines and existing methods seemingly require the least modification.

In this paper, we review recent works on neural gloss translation. We find that limitations of gloss-based approaches in general and limitations of specific datasets are not transparently discussed as inherent shortcomings. Furthermore, among gloss translation papers there is no common standard for evaluation, especially regarding the exact method to compute BLEU scores.

Experiments in sign language translation should be informed by sign language expertise and should be performed according to the best practices already established in the MT community.

To alleviate these problems going forward, we make practical recommendations for future research on gloss translation.

Our paper makes the following contributions:

- • We provide a review of recent works on gloss translation (§ [2](#S2) ).
- • We outline recommendations for future work which promote awareness of the inherent limitations of gloss-based approaches, realistic datasets, stronger baselines and convincing evaluation (§ [3](#S3) ).

## 2 Related work

For a general overview of sign language processing in the context of NLP see Yin et al. ( [2021](#bib.bib38) ); Moryossef and Goldberg ( [2021](#bib.bib22) ) and De Coster et al. ( [2022](#bib.bib6) ) for a comprehensive survey of sign language machine translation (including, but not limited to, gloss-based approaches).

We conduct a more narrow literature review of 14 recent publications on gloss translation. We report characteristics such as the datasets used, translation directions, and evaluation details (Table [2](#S2.T2) ).

### 2.1 Awareness of limitations of gloss approach

We find that 8 out of 14 reviewed works do not include an adequate discussion of the limitations of gloss approaches, inadvertently overstating the potential usefulness of their experiments.

In the context of sign languages,

glosses are unique identifiers for individual signs. However, a linear sequence of glosses is not an adequate representation of a signed utterance, where different channels (manual and non-manual) are engaged simultaneously. Linguistically relevant cues such as non-manual movement or use of three-dimensional space may be missing (Yin et al.,

[2021](#bib.bib38) ) .

The gloss transcription conventions of different corpora vary greatly, as does the level of detail (see Kopf et al. ( [2022](#bib.bib15) ) for an overview of differences and commonalities between corpora).

Therefore, glosses in different corpora or across languages are not comparable. Gloss transcription is an enormously laborious process done by expert linguists.

Besides, glosses are a linguistic tool, not a writing system established in Deaf 1 1 1 It is a widely recognized convention to use the uppercased word *Deaf* for describing members of a sign language community and, in contrast, to use the lowercased word *deaf* when describing the audiological state of a hearing loss (Morgan and Woll, [2002](#bib.bib21) ) . More recent works (Napier and Leeson, [2016](#bib.bib25) ; Kusters et al., [2017](#bib.bib16) ) propose to use *deaf* in both situations. communities. Sign language users generally do not read or write glosses in their everyday lives.

Taken together, this means that gloss translation suffers from an inherent and irrecoverable information loss,

that creating an abundance of translations transcribed as glosses is unrealistic, and that gloss translation systems are not immediately useful to end users.

### 2.2 Choice of dataset

All reviewed works use the RWTH-PHOENIX Weather 2014T (hereafter abbreviated as PHOENIX ) dataset (Forster et al., [2014](#bib.bib11) ; Camgöz et al., [2018](#bib.bib3) ) while other datasets are used far less frequently. Besides, we note a distinct paucity of languages and translation directions: 12 out of 14 works are concerned only with translation between German Sign Language (DGS) and German (DE), the language pair of the PHOENIX dataset.

While PHOENIX was a breakthrough when it was published, it is of limited use for current research.

The dataset is small (8k sentence pairs) and contains only weather reports, covering a very narrow linguistic domain. It is important to discuss the exact nature of glosses, how the corpus was created and how it is distributed.

#### Glossing

PHOENIX is based on German weather reports interpreted into DGS and broadcast on the TV station Phoenix.

The broadcast videos served as input for the DGS side of the parallel corpus. Compared to the glossing conventions of other well-known corpora, PHOENIX glosses are simplistic and capture mostly manual features (with mouthings as the only non-manual activity covered), which is not sufficient to represent meaning (§

[2.1](#S2.SS1) ).

#### Live interpretation and translationese effects

The fact that PHOENIX data comes from interpretation in a live setting has two implications: Firstly, since information was conveyed at high speed, the sign language interpreters omitted pieces of information from time to time. This leads to an information mismatch between some German sentences and their DGS counterparts. Secondly, due to the high speed of transmission, the (hearing) interpreters sometimes followed the grammar of German more closely than that of DGS. As a consequence, some translations are more similar to Signed German ( Lautsprachbegleitendes Gebärden ) than DGS.

#### Preprocessing of spoken language

The German side of the PHOENIX corpus is available only already tokenized, lowercased and with punctuation symbols removed. From an MT perspective this is unexpected since corpora are usually distributed without such preprocessing.

PHOENIX is popular because it is freely available and is a benchmark with clearly defined data splits introduced by Camgöz et al. ( [2018](#bib.bib3) ) . Sign language machine translation as a field is experiencing a shortage of free and open datasets and, with the exception of PHOENIX, there are no agreed-upon data splits.

Essentially, from a scientific point of view achieving higher gloss translation quality on the PHOENIX dataset is near meaningless. The apparent overuse of PHOENIX is reminiscent of the overuse of MNIST (LeCun et al., [2010](#bib.bib17) ) in machine learning, or the overuse of the WMT 14 English-German benchmark in the MT community, popularized by Vaswani et al. ( [2017](#bib.bib36) ) .

### 2.3 Evaluation

As evaluation metrics, all works use some variant of BLEU (Papineni et al., [2002](#bib.bib27) ) , and ten out of 14 use some variant of ROUGE (Lin, [2004](#bib.bib18) ) . All but four papers do not contain enough information about how exactly BLEU was computed. Different BLEU implementations, settings (e.g. ngram orders, tokenization schemes) and versions are used.

#### Non-standard metrics

ROUGE is a metric common in automatic summarization but not in MT, and was never correlated with human judgement in a large study.

In eight out of 14 papers, BLEU is used with a non-standard maximum ngram order, producing variants such as BLEU-1, BLEU-2, etc. Similar to ROUGE, these variants of BLEU have never been validated as metrics of translation quality, and their use is scientifically unmotivated.

#### Tokenization

BLEU requires tokenized machine translations and references. Modern tools therefore apply a tokenization procedure internally and implicitly (independently of the MT system's preprocessing).

Computing BLEU with tokenization on glosses leads to seemingly better scores but is misleading since tokenization creates many trivial matches.

For instance, in corpora that make use of the character $ in glosses (e.g. the DGS Corpus (Konrad et al.,

[2022](#bib.bib14) ) ), $ is split off as a single character, inflating the ngram sub-scores.

For an illustration see Table

[3](#S2.T3) (and Appendix [A](#A1) for a complete code listing) where we demonstrate that using or omitting tokenization leads to a difference of 15 BLEU.

#### Spurious gains

Different implementations of BLEU or different tokenizations lead to differences in BLEU bigger than what many papers describe as an "improvement" over previous work (Post, [2018](#bib.bib30) ) . Incorrectly attributing such improvements to, for instance, changes to the model architecture amounts to a "failure to identify the sources of empirical gains" (Lipton and Steinhardt, [2019](#bib.bib19) ) .

In a similar vein, we observe that papers on gloss translation tend to copy scores from previous papers without knowing whether the evaluation procedures are in fact the same. This constitutes a general trend in recent MT literature (Marie et al.,

[2021](#bib.bib20) ) .

In summary, some previous works on gloss translation have used 1) automatic metrics that are not suitable for MT or 2)

well-established MT metrics in ways that are not recommended.

BLEU with standard settings and tools is inappropriate for gloss outputs.

The recommended way to compute BLEU on gloss output is to use the tool SacreBLEU (Post, [2018](#bib.bib30) ) and to disable internal tokenization.

Nevertheless, even with these precautions, it is important to note that BLEU was never validated empirically as an evaluation metric for gloss output. Some aspects of BLEU may not be adequate for a sequence of glosses, such as its emphasis on whitespaces to mark the boundaries of meaningful units that are the basis of the final score.

Other string-based metrics such as CHRF (Popović, [2016](#bib.bib29) ) may be viable alternatives for gloss evaluation. CHRF is a character-based metric and its correlation with human judgement is at least as good as BLEU's (Kocmi et al., [2021](#bib.bib13) ) .

### 2.4 Further observations

More informally (beyond what we show in Table [2](#S2.T2) ), we observe that most papers do not process glosses in any corpus-specific way, that particular modeling and training decisions may not be ideal for low-resource gloss translation and that document-level systems may be crucial.

#### Preprocessing glosses

Glosses are created for linguistic purposes (§ [2.1](#S2.SS1) ), not necessarily with machine translation in mind. Particular gloss parts are not relevant for translation and, if kept, make the problem harder unnecessarily.

For instance, a corpus transcription and annotation scheme might prescribe that meaning-equivalent, minor form variants of signs

2 2 2 In spoken language linguistics, these occurrences are called *allophonic variants* . We refrain from using the term here, as sign languages do not consist of sounds ( *phones* ). are transcribed as different glosses.

An example of meaning-equivalent form variants in some sign languages is a flat handshape with the thumb adducted (aligned with the remaining fingers) or spread.

Reading or producing such meaning-equivalent variants may not be relevant for an MT system and makes the learning problem harder.

Since the particular nature of glosses is specific to every corpus, it is necessary to preprocess glosses in a corpus-specific way. We illustrate corpus-specific gloss processing in Appendix [B](#A2) , using the Public DGS Corpus Hanke et al. ( [2020](#bib.bib12) ) as an example.

#### Modeling and training decisions

Gloss translation experiments are certainly low-resource scenarios and therefore, best practices for optimizing MT systems on low-resource datasets apply (Sennrich and Zhang, [2019](#bib.bib33) ) . For example, dropout rates or label smoothing should be set accordingly, and the vocabulary of subwords of a subword model should be generally small (Ding et al., [2019](#bib.bib8) ) .

Gloss translation models are often compared to other approaches as baselines, it is therefore problematic if those gloss baselines are weak and unoptimized (Denkowski and Neubig, [2017](#bib.bib7) ) .

#### Limitations of sentence-level systems

All surveyed works propose sentence-level systems, as opposed to larger-context models.

For sign language MT specifically, sentence-level approaches have inherent limitations.

Signed languages exhibit frequent referencing (or "indexing") behaviour similar to anaphora in spoken languages. But while in spoken languages ambiguities arising from anaphora can often be resolved with sentence-level context, that is not the case for signed languages. After a subject was introduced with a sign once it is often unacceptable to use the sign again in a later utterance of the discourse, instead the subject is referred to with an index (see e.g. Engberg-Pedersen, [1993](#bib.bib10) ). Besides, sign languages are generally not gendered (which for spoken languages helps disambiguate by narrowing down

possible antecedents).

Document-level benchmarks (e.g. Bawden et al., [2018](#bib.bib2) ; Müller et al., [2018](#bib.bib24) ) show that for spoken languages, document-level context is not crucial since sentence-level baseline systems have relatively high performance. For signed languages, discourse context may be indispensable.

We are not aware of any existing discourse-level translation system for sign languages but we believe they could be investigated in the future.

## 3 Recommendations for gloss translation

Based on our review of recent works on gloss translation, we make the following recommendations for future research:

- • Demonstrate awareness of limitations of gloss approaches (§ [2.1](#S2.SS1) ), and explicitly discuss them in the paper.
- • Focus on datasets beyond PHOENIX. Openly discuss the limited size and linguistic domain of PHOENIX (§ [2.2](#S2.SS2) ).
- • Use metrics that are well-established in MT. Compute BLEU with SacreBLEU, report metric signatures and disable internal tokenization for gloss outputs. Do not compare to scores produced with a different or unknown evaluation procedure (§ [2.3](#S2.SS3) ).
- • Given that glossing is corpus-specific (§ [2.1](#S2.SS1) ), process glosses in a corpus-specific way, informed by the respective transcription conventions (§ [2.4](#S2.SS4) ).
- • Optimize gloss translation baselines with methods shown to be effective for low-resource MT (§ [2.4](#S2.SS4) ).

We also believe publishing reproducible code makes works on gloss translation more valuable.

## 4 Conclusion

In this paper we have shown that some recent works on gloss translation lack awareness of the inherent limitations of glosses and common datasets, as well as a standardized evaluation method (§ [2](#S2) ). In order to make future research on gloss translation more meaningful, we make practical recommendations (§ [3](#S3) ).

We urge researchers to spell out limitations of gloss translation approaches, e.g. in the now mandatory limitation sections of *ACL papers, and to strengthen their findings by implementing existing best practices in MT.

Finally, we also caution that researchers should consider whether gloss translation is worthwhile, and if time and effort would be better spent on basic linguistic tools (such as segmentation, alignment or coreference resolution), creating training corpora or translation methods that do not rely on glosses.

## Data licensing

The license of the Public DGS Corpus 3 3 3 [https://www.sign-lang.uni-hamburg.de/meinedgs/ling/license\_en.html](https://www.sign-lang.uni-hamburg.de/meinedgs/ling/license_en.html) (which we use only as examples in Table [3](#S2.T3) and Appendix [B](#A2) ) does not allow any computational research except if express permission is given by the University of Hamburg.

## Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the EU Horizon 2020 project EASIER (grant agreement no. 101016982) and the Swiss Innovation Agency (Innosuisse) flagship IICT (PFFS-21-47).

We thank the DGS Corpus team at the University of Hamburg for helpful discussions on gloss preprocessing.

## References

- Angelova et al. (2022) Galina Angelova, Eleftherios Avramidis, and Sebastian Möller. 2022. [Using neural machine translation methods for sign language translation](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-srw.21) . In *Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop* , pages 273-284, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Bawden et al. (2018) Rachel Bawden, Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, and Barry Haddow. 2018. [Evaluating discourse phenomena in neural machine translation](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N18-1118) . In *Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers)* , pages 1304-1313, New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Camgöz et al. (2018) Necati Cihan Camgöz, Simon Hadfield, Oscar Koller, Hermann Ney, and Richard Bowden. 2018. [Neural sign language translation](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00812) . In *2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition* , pages 7784-7793.
- Camgöz et al. (2020a) Necati Cihan Camgöz, Oscar Koller, Simon Hadfield, and Richard Bowden. 2020a. [Multi-channel transformers for multi-articulatory sign language translation](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66823-5_18) . In *Computer Vision - ECCV 2020 Workshops: Glasgow, UK, August 23-28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV* , page 301-319, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag.
- Camgöz et al. (2020b) Necati Cihan Camgöz, Oscar Koller, Simon Hadfield, and Richard Bowden. 2020b. Sign language transformers: Joint end-to-end sign language recognition and translation. In *IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* .
- De Coster et al. (2022) Mathieu De Coster, Dimitar Shterionov, Mieke Van Herreweghe, and Joni Dambre. 2022. Machine translation from signed to spoken languages: State of the art and challenges. *arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03086* .
- Denkowski and Neubig (2017) Michael Denkowski and Graham Neubig. 2017. [Stronger baselines for trustable results in neural machine translation](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W17-3203) . In *Proceedings of the First Workshop on Neural Machine Translation* , pages 18-27, Vancouver. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Ding et al. (2019) Shuoyang Ding, Adithya Renduchintala, and Kevin Duh. 2019. [A call for prudent choice of subword merge operations in neural machine translation](https://aclanthology.org/W19-6620) . In *Proceedings of Machine Translation Summit XVII: Research Track* , pages 204-213, Dublin, Ireland. European Association for Machine Translation.
- Egea Gómez et al. (2021) Santiago Egea Gómez, Euan McGill, and Horacio Saggion. 2021. [Syntax-aware transformers for neural machine translation: The case of text to sign gloss translation](https://aclanthology.org/2021.bucc-1.4) . In *Proceedings of the 14th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora (BUCC 2021)* , pages 18-27, Online (Virtual Mode). INCOMA Ltd.
- Engberg-Pedersen (1993) Elisabeth Engberg-Pedersen. 1993. *Space in Danish Sign Language: The Semantics and Morphosyntax of the Use of Space in a Visual Language* . SIGNUM-Press.
- Forster et al. (2014) Jens Forster, Christoph Schmidt, Oscar Koller, Martin Bellgardt, and Hermann Ney. 2014. [Extensions of the sign language recognition and translation corpus RWTH-PHOENIX-weather](http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2014/pdf/585_Paper.pdf) . In *Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC'14)* , pages 1911-1916, Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
- Hanke et al. (2020) Thomas Hanke, Marc Schulder, Reiner Konrad, and Elena Jahn. 2020. [Extending the Public DGS Corpus in size and depth](https://www.sign-lang.uni-hamburg.de/lrec/pub/20016.pdf) . In *Proceedings of the LREC2020 9th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Sign Language Resources in the Service of the Language Community, Technological Challenges and Application Perspectives* , pages 75-82, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
- Kocmi et al. (2021) Tom Kocmi, Christian Federmann, Roman Grundkiewicz, Marcin Junczys-Dowmunt, Hitokazu Matsushita, and Arul Menezes. 2021. [To ship or not to ship: An extensive evaluation of automatic metrics for machine translation](https://aclanthology.org/2021.wmt-1.57) . In *Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on Machine Translation* , pages 478-494, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Konrad et al. (2022) Reiner Konrad, Thomas Hanke, Gabriele Langer, Susanne König, Lutz König, Rie Nishio, and Anja Regen. 2022. [Public DGS Corpus: Annotation Conventions / Öffentliches DGS-Korpus: Annotationskonventionen](https://doi.org/10.25592/uhhfdm.10251) .
- Kopf et al. (2022) Maria Kopf, Marc Schulder, Thomas Hanke, and Sam Bigeard. 2022. [Specification for the harmonization of sign language annotations](https://doi.org/10.25592/uhhfdm.9842) .
- Kusters et al. (2017) Annelies Maria Jozef Kusters, Dai O'Brien, and Maartje De Meulder. 2017. Innovations in Deaf Studies: Critically Mapping the Field. In Annelies Kusters, Maartje De Meulder, and Dai O'Brien, editors, *Innovations in Deaf Studies* , pages 1-53. Oxford University Press, United Kingdom.
- LeCun et al. (2010) Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and CJ Burges. 2010. Mnist handwritten digit database. *ATT Labs [Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist* , 2.
- Lin (2004) Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. [ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries](https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013) . In *Text Summarization Branches Out* , pages 74-81, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Lipton and Steinhardt (2019) Zachary C. Lipton and Jacob Steinhardt. 2019. [Troubling trends in machine learning scholarship: Some ml papers suffer from flaws that could mislead the public and stymie future research.](https://doi.org/10.1145/3317287.3328534) *Queue* , 17(1):45-77.
- Marie et al. (2021) Benjamin Marie, Atsushi Fujita, and Raphael Rubino. 2021. [Scientific credibility of machine translation research: A meta-evaluation of 769 papers](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.566) . In *Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers)* , pages 7297-7306, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Morgan and Woll (2002) Gary Morgan and Bencie Woll. 2002. The development of complex sentences in British Sign Language. In Gary Morgan and Bencie Woll, editors, *Directions in Sign Language Acquisition: Trends in Language Acquisition Research* , pages 255-276. John Benjamins, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
- Moryossef and Goldberg (2021) Amit Moryossef and Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Sign Language Processing. [https://sign-language-processing.github.io/](https://sign-language-processing.github.io/) .
- Moryossef et al. (2021) Amit Moryossef, Kayo Yin, Graham Neubig, and Yoav Goldberg. 2021. [Data augmentation for sign language gloss translation](https://aclanthology.org/2021.mtsummit-at4ssl.1) . In *Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Automatic Translation for Signed and Spoken Languages (AT4SSL)* , pages 1-11, Virtual. Association for Machine Translation in the Americas.
- Müller et al. (2018) Mathias Müller, Annette Rios, Elena Voita, and Rico Sennrich. 2018. [A large-scale test set for the evaluation of context-aware pronoun translation in neural machine translation](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-6307) . In *Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers* , pages 61-72, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Napier and Leeson (2016) Jemina Napier and Lorraine Leeson. 2016. *Sign Language in Action* . Palgrave Macmillan, London.
- Orbay and Akarun (2020) Alptekin Orbay and Lale Akarun. 2020. [Neural sign language translation by learning tokenization](https://doi.org/10.1109/FG47880.2020.00002) . In *2020 15th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG 2020)* , pages 222-228.
- Papineni et al. (2002) Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. [Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation](https://doi.org/10.3115/1073083.1073135) . In *Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics* , pages 311-318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Pizzuto et al. (2006) Elena Antinoro Pizzuto, Paolo Rossini, and Tommaso Russo. 2006. [Representing signed languages in written form: Questions that need to be posed](https://www.sign-lang.uni-hamburg.de/lrec/pub/06001.pdf) . In *Proceedings of the LREC2006 2nd Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Lexicographic Matters and Didactic Scenarios* , pages 1-6, Genoa, Italy. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
- Popović (2016) Maja Popović. 2016. [chrF deconstructed: beta parameters and n-gram weights](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W16-2341) . In *Proceedings of the First Conference on Machine Translation: Volume 2, Shared Task Papers* , pages 499-504, Berlin, Germany. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Post (2018) Matt Post. 2018. [A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-6319) . In *Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers* , pages 186-191, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Saunders et al. (2020) Ben Saunders, Necati Cihan Camgöz, and Richard Bowden. 2020. Progressive Transformers for End-to-End Sign Language Production. In *Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV)* .
- Saunders et al. (2022) Ben Saunders, Necati Cihan Camgöz, and Richard Bowden. 2022. Signing at Scale: Learning to Co-Articulate Signs for Large-Scale Photo-Realistic Sign Language Production. In *Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* .
- Sennrich and Zhang (2019) Rico Sennrich and Biao Zhang. 2019. [Revisiting low-resource neural machine translation: A case study](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1021) . In *Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics* , pages 211-221, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Stoll et al. (2018) Stephanie Stoll, Necati Cihan Camgöz, Simon Hadfield, and Richard Bowden. 2018. Sign language production using neural machine translation and generative adversarial networks. In *Proceedings of the 29th British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC 2018)* . British Machine Vision Association.
- Stoll et al. (2020) Stephanie Stoll, Necati Cihan Camgöz, Simon Hadfield, and Richard Bowden. 2020. Text2sign: towards sign language production using neural machine translation and generative adversarial networks. *International Journal of Computer Vision* , 128(4):891-908.
- Vaswani et al. (2017) Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is All you Need. In *Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30* , pages 5998-6008.
- Walsh et al. (2022) Harry Walsh, Ben Saunders, and Richard Bowden. 2022. [Changing the representation: Examining language representation for neural sign language production](https://aclanthology.org/2022.sltat-1.18) . In *Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Sign Language Translation and Avatar Technology: The Junction of the Visual and the Textual: Challenges and Perspectives* , pages 117-124, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association.
- Yin et al. (2021) Kayo Yin, Amit Moryossef, Julie Hochgesang, Yoav Goldberg, and Malihe Alikhani. 2021. [Including signed languages in natural language processing](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.570) . In *Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers)* , pages 7347-7360, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Yin and Read (2020) Kayo Yin and Jesse Read. 2020. [Better sign language translation with STMC-transformer](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.525) . In *Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics* , pages 5975-5989, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee on Computational Linguistics.
- Zhang and Duh (2021) Xuan Zhang and Kevin Duh. 2021. [Approaching sign language gloss translation as a low-resource machine translation task](https://aclanthology.org/2021.mtsummit-at4ssl.7) . In *Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Automatic Translation for Signed and Spoken Languages (AT4SSL)* , pages 60-70, Virtual. Association for Machine Translation in the Americas.

## Appendix A Impact of internal tokenization when computing BLEU on gloss sequences

## Appendix B Example for corpus-specific gloss preprocessing

For this example we recommend to download and process release 3.0 of the corpus.

To DGS glosses we suggest to apply the following modifications derived from the DGS Corpus transcription conventions (Konrad et al.,

[2022](#bib.bib14) ) :

- • Removing entirely two specific gloss types that cannot possibly help the translation: $GEST-OFF and $$EXTRA-LING-MAN .
- • Removing ad-hoc deviations from citation forms, marked by * . Example: ANDERS1* → → \rightarrow ANDERS1 .
- • Removing the distinction between type glosses and subtype glosses, marked by ^ . Example: WISSEN2B^ → → \rightarrow WISSEN2B .
- • Collapsing phonological variations of the same type that are meaning-equivalent. Such variants are marked with uppercase letter suffixes. Example: WISSEN2B → → \rightarrow WISSEN2 .
- • Deliberately keep numerals ( $NUM ), list glosses ( $LIST ) and finger alphabet ( $ALPHA ) intact, except for removing handshape variants.

See Table [4](#A2.T4) for examples for this preprocessing step. Overall these simplifications should reduce the number of observed forms while not affecting the machine translation task. For other purposes such as linguistic analysis our preprocessing would of course be detrimental.

While this preprocessing method provides a good baseline, it can certainly be refined further. For instance, the treatment of two-handed signs could be improved. If a gloss occurs simultaneously on both hands, we either keep both glosses or remove one occurrence. In both cases, information about the simultaneity of signs is lost during preprocessing and preserving it could potentially improve translation.

## References

- [[06c8cdd8c517e45adcbb519d77c897aaa6766282]] — Sign Language Translation from Instructional Videos (2023)
- [[aa7ad26452f98caa8b500d8ff338668724a5bb40]] — Ham2Pose: Animating Sign Language Notation into Pose Sequences (2022)
- [[a4b404872f075c10c0c07114e7805907508fdf49]] — Changing the Representation: Examining Language Representation for Neural Sign Language Production (2022)
- [[e7785f286ad1250557cfe533443b5ddc134f846a]] — Signing at Scale: Learning to Co-Articulate Signs for Large-Scale Photo-Realistic Sign Language Production (2022)
- [[7366fe7b4e7756dd13220d29077142ff802b41b3]] — Machine translation from signed to spoken languages: state of the art and challenges (2022)
- [[8b7bfd0d0998a3d5407b03882d1171d78bf98a65]] — To Ship or Not to Ship: An Extensive Evaluation of Automatic Metrics for Machine Translation (2021)
- [[e399e78f2c236802aa50aef95554a3768079edb1]] — Scientific Credibility of Machine Translation Research: A Meta-Evaluation of 769 Papers (2021)
- [[69817744fc9c4ba8062c780d295983903194d20e]] — Data Augmentation for Sign Language Gloss Translation (2021)
- [[c4358134954d8e62939c3a8b9ba8e953d951f73b]] — Including Signed Languages in Natural Language Processing (2021)
- [[9e67b9758520e49016ab66bafb974d2e1ed762d1]] — COMET: A Neural Framework for MT Evaluation (2020)
- [[279acb6dd5936977f67f4dae3b55128418ebd11f]] — Public DGS Corpus: Annotation Conventions / Öffentliches DGS-Korpus: Annotationskonventionen (2020)
- [[4fe56f5f7a7196571e81ec243d86df376269695c]] — Multi-channel Transformers for Multi-articulatory Sign Language Translation (2020)
- [[58cdf6a994558124d5c4f836473837e778530be2]] — Extending the Public DGS Corpus in Size and Depth (2020)
- [[5a65e6184d18cd93ccbaa4d940a27749358ef824]] — Progressive Transformers for End-to-End Sign Language Production (2020)
- [[7153c3b129f1e6423dea6afcdbb57466466cd2cc]] — Better Sign Language Translation with STMC-Transformer (2020)
- [[05dcdfece56d1869895f53ed581d8ad64118c05f]] — Sign Language Transformers: Joint End-to-End Sign Language Recognition and Translation (2020)
- [[4e39e59f41a480f68c934cc38eb874a25ceb5073]] — Neural Sign Language Translation by Learning Tokenization (2020)
- [[7f6231aae6e5eb5b62f85429f3ad8eaa96fee11e]] — Text2Sign: Towards Sign Language Production Using Neural Machine Translation and Generative Adversarial Networks (2020)
- [[d9f1eed347959149f27002485a7fe339604fe45d]] — Revisiting Low-Resource Neural Machine Translation: A Case Study (2019)
- [[f9160d669a65b1283636d2eae524144ef4f0f658]] — A Call for Prudent Choice of Subword Merge Operations in Neural Machine Translation (2019)
- [[212d7af298a4bd9090b834293067d2f091a95cfc]] — Sign Language Production using Neural Machine Translation and Generative Adversarial Networks (2018)
- [[dab261b25ff8ccd2c9144a5cb3a46b39ac0ac4bd]] — Troubling Trends in Machine Learning Scholarship (2018)
- [[644602c65a5d8f30e62be027eb7b47f7c335191a]] — Neural Sign Language Translation (2018)
- [[b4bfadfca9742bb3ee98a0cd322d5ce4e59a3ceb]] — A Call for Clarity in Reporting BLEU Scores (2018)
- [[5503ed99ad2a536e00508432e87553786e1eaa3f]] — Evaluating Discourse Phenomena in Neural Machine Translation (2017)
- [[204e3073870fae3d05bcbc2f6a8e263d9b72e776]] — Attention is All you Need (2017)
- [[f4c8539bed600c9c652aba76a996b8188761d3fe]] — Stronger Baselines for Trustable Results in Neural Machine Translation (2017)
- [[302fd0047001d3f577b376c935572efebb759e27]] — Innovations in deaf studies: Critically mapping the Field (2017)
- [[14c1c84f8537186fcf147d1f95cae3c8133b143a]] — chrF deconstructed: beta parameters and n-gram weights (2016)
- [[6d76325fb01aee827ea6330af58e3d748bdfea5a]] — Sign Language in Action (2016)
- [[109156b008f569fd279bddc48ae0d462b82ca635]] — Extensions of the Sign Language Recognition and Translation Corpus RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather (2014)
- [[6ff5e6bb40c386d1b1aa32f690f3decead76ef1b]] — Sign Language Processing (2010)
- [[60b05f32c32519a809f21642ef1eb3eaf3848008]] — ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries (2004)
- [[d7da009f457917aa381619facfa5ffae9329a6e9]] — Bleu: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation (2002)
- [[b845f1634cf88dd44fdf3d11e5f15783c1797012]] — The development of complex sentences in British Sign Language (2002)
- [[13247562760f973b08b81694cf959362e8f6feb7]] — Using Neural Machine Translation Methods for Sign Language Translation (2022)
- [[6140abf6acd1a3594a69c24edf1cbe448489e6ef]] — Findings of the First WMT Shared Task on Sign Language Translation (WMT-SLT22) (2022)
- Specification for the harmonization of sign language annotations (2022)
- [[78185ca44944e23c89ae165f5b83d420d5e36661]] — Approaching Sign Language Gloss Translation as a Low-Resource Machine Translation Task (2021)
- [[af12207a8aed82bbb99b1725a7764e968ca7d0e4]] — Syntax-aware Transformers for Neural Machine Translation: The Case of Text to Sign Gloss Translation (2021)
- Mnist handwritten digit database (2010)
- Representing signed languages in written form: Questions that need to be posed (2006)
- [[4d46a0cd693ebab1372302b0d6aa680c5dabfdf3]] — Space in Danish sign language : the semantics and morphosyntax of the use of space in a visual language (1993)

## Cited by

- [[b15ad29a89182126b25d19cfcacf8574ea876afa]] — Improving Sign Language Translation via Gloss Guided Temporal and Representation Alignment (2026)
- [[7a7e71b9261ce04d6a65b170a8b9942eab6d6d7b]] — SignVLA: A Gloss-Free Vision-Language-Action Framework for Real-Time Sign Language-Guided Robotic Manipulation (2026)
- [[eca4875c9e6e46148e85985023bb84367e3ec9f6]] — Sign language translation via cross-modal alignment and graph convolution (2026)
- [[8b440fd23f5533afd77de1bab2c8f8d1f2337339]] — Lost in Translation, Found in Embeddings: Sign Language Translation and Alignment (2025)
- [[c59b8321784fee0c537e40c634ea42aa31d1e3d4]] — SONAR-SLT: Multilingual Sign Language Translation via Language-Agnostic Sentence Embedding Supervision (2025)
- [[48892703af8836b5f756241bd235e07e8d803b70]] — Meaningful Pose-Based Sign Language Evaluation (2025)
- [[cb44e02a66c108551e4c71579bfb85376bede6e9]] — Modality Matters: Training and Tokenization Effects in Sign-to-Text Translation (2025)
- [[2c47ea298354df5b6a95fbb44f40efe3b6439747]] — MultimodalHugs: Enabling Sign Language Processing in Hugging Face (2025)
- [[51e31634514bf5a09c670f0dc28c16a45c0df3e7]] — Evaluation of a Sign Language Avatar on Comprehensibility, User Experience & Acceptability (2025)
- [[d2a83b60fde5caad2049cbc17800f85193a9915c]] — Design and Development of Efficient English Translation Framework Using Neural Machine Translation Techniques (2025)
- [[5b03b783b4cedd9f0ab15c4120d995968175cc91]] — Multilingual Gloss-free Sign Language Translation: Towards Building a Sign Language Foundation Model (2025)
- [[7fad2054de6a297e5425d298ad53381aecf45d80]] — Automatic sign language to text translation using MediaPipe and transformer architectures (2025)
- [[975c69867e06735ea9d078ef80ce974ebdcf786f]] — Enhancing Cross Language for English-Telugu pairs through the Modified Transformer Model based Neural Machine Translation (2025)
- [[a735cfc188c58eb4fa6824600d22c3c75de6c77e]] — Towards AI-driven Sign Language Generation with Non-manual Markers (2025)
- [[54c68eac946a102a3cb8c923701bf18c8f70f5eb]] — A review of deep learning-based approaches to sign language processing (2024)
- [[1ffb51c115fd904f8ca2a080c8247711fe0780a8]] — Signs as Tokens: A Retrieval-Enhanced Multilingual Sign Language Generator (2024)
- [[0bb682b79a85450b09c6bab9a4d244a577c9dc5f]] — Marathi Text to ISL Gloss Translation Using LSTM, GRU and Transformer Neural Models (2024)
- [[6bd815b10d44296e7afba516a976463006001290]] — A Comprehensive Review of Sign Language Production (2024)
- [[5d249e944564fcfac53ee2556eeaa90a00a0a195]] — The American Sign Language Knowledge Graph: Infusing ASL Models with Linguistic Knowledge (2024)
- [[af2f08252b09bb2d1fadb564d693fefd1f26ceae]] — Generating Signed Language Instructions in Large-Scale Dialogue Systems (2024)
- [[4f4dfb8e85f64acee73ec6181a9604edec496132]] — ELMI: Interactive and Intelligent Sign Language Translation of Lyrics for Song Signing (2024)
- [[40302073ad4c9eb97fb5c7cd151ac8a70fc3374f]] — Research of semantic aspects of the Kazakh language when translating into the Kazakh sign language (2024)
- [[933c6d3bc6b0fb8f4e15a1dd63d953f2985811b3]] — iSign: A Benchmark for Indian Sign Language Processing (2024)
- [[4c850c928197df19ba57270d7c577e8f96ddd809]] — Reconsidering Sentence-Level Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[1fde949d8bb3a1a7cdd4494ec00ca86ce771cd6d]] — Semi-Supervised Spoken Language Glossification (2024)
- [[206d500b038d6827fd95b428ce586b88ce1901d0]] — Action-Concentrated Embedding Framework: This Is Your Captain Sign-tokening (2024)
- [[649b86d31d8ae10cc973da90e1e672d09c174764]] — DGS-Fabeln-1: A Multi-Angle Parallel Corpus of Fairy Tales between German Sign Language and German Text (2024)
- [[94f7b0e15bd7837818f68bc36b194c5a78f48b4a]] — SignBLEU: Automatic Evaluation of Multi-channel Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[8dd60a2091b16dab17d0c88c48484ecd40f07d45]] — Advancing Annotation for Continuous Data in Swiss German Sign Language (2024)
- [[febe13b59a5fc83d4b09a0ae6306d90c01f550d3]] — Towards Understanding Neural Machine Translation with Attention Heads’ Importance (2024)
- [[e8dd2e6a9f155fb17b153594f71deb91a29f5b07]] — Towards Privacy-Aware Sign Language Translation at Scale (2024)
- [[8a515cec1559414759aa3c732fa5f4ceb8972267]] — Towards Online Continuous Sign Language Recognition and Translation (2024)
- [[aac82bf9ae4f8b8ff8af15d1102c04aa1486295f]] — JWSign: A Highly Multilingual Corpus of Bible Translations for more Diversity in Sign Language Processing (2023)
- [[731b8bd08307dc3c49249e5203ceb43ec1fc5e07]] — Autoregressive Sign Language Production: A Gloss-Free Approach with Discrete Representations (2023)
- [[93aaae7414afafad15d5a6f287ca081b2397a636]] — American Sign Language Translation Using Transfer Learning (2023)
- [[fbbd76d71388f55ee6ac37a0b90b14d2f47f16a1]] — An Open-Source Gloss-Based Baseline for Spoken to Signed Language Translation (2023)
- [[3bbc8841012fdb5971d1c86dff528edd8590f1b8]] — SLTUNET: A Simple Unified Model for Sign Language Translation (2023)
- [[42a2b3894bd76fa55df5f8006f5d11da85f8c42c]] — Machine Translation between Spoken Languages and Signed Languages Represented in SignWriting (2022)
- [[b75387209ee2e9449dcf7fe11dda120ee03d9ac7]] — Gloss-Internal Graph Construction and Encoding for Sign Language Translation (2026)
- [[b0904cd23ba78c4629d71e3989ce59fd50aca5f2]] — How to Align Multiple Signed Language Corpora for Better Sign-to-Sign Translations? (2025)
- [[3d54f708909b25a5136eb4d6bfcbbed53649c933]] — DEEP: an automatic bidirectional translator leveraging an ASR for translation of Italian sign language (2025)
- [[9dd5d5c6427f907efdaa3336af00c35f1d4a06f9]] — Low-Resource Sign Language Glossing Profits From Data Augmentation (2025)
- [[443241e5e0c4c2f9518ec16c2a1df7a6794c5d9f]] — Exploring Coreference Resolution in Glosses of German Sign Language (2025)
- [[0b0d74e41396b48f761a6910357963a6af6af5eb]] — Automatic Annotation Elaboration as Feedback to Sign Language Learners (2024)
- [[c8ff64218608a12e991b8276eff6da2ec01cc52c]] — Bootstrapping Pre-trained Word Embedding Models for Sign Language Gloss Translation (2024)
- [[10d0aba02f182a94fde63c540e62534aee2827b1]] — Visual Alignment Pre-training for Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[65decffc76312f963be4678760d158321b131f5c]] — AfriSign: Machine Translation for African Sign Languages (2023)
- [[065f19a17ac5a6d7fe91d0f0b5ad2de7193856d5]] — Neural Machine Translation Methods for Translating Text to Sign Language Glosses (2023)
- [[e268817678bbc27c75c23f46a911da27c4ad9b14]] — AT 4 SSL Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Automatic Translation for Signed and Spoken Languages 15 June 2023 (2023)
- [[81c03a26af98522bacd6cf566807fc08d596dada]] — TTIC’s Submission to WMT-SLT 23 (2023)
- [[9cd8913cdf45ea2b242ec4fcf3f1da25da53fc86]] — KnowComp Submission for WMT23 Sign Language Translation Task (2023)
- [[604cc00ff6a4d57d97856b49be4df89452cf30a8]] — Findings of the Second WMT Shared Task on Sign Language Translation (WMT-SLT23) (2023)
- [[3dc3fabfb9ebb6afb6d0702dca08412a74b1b3fc]] — Trends and Challenges for Sign Language Recognition with Machine Learning (2023)
- [[6140abf6acd1a3594a69c24edf1cbe448489e6ef]] — Findings of the First WMT Shared Task on Sign Language Translation (WMT-SLT22) (2022)

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: ar5iv
- bibtex: ours
