---
semanticScholarId: "55604c7773a0c38a6811f6c4b94d882796d78f3a"
bibKey: null
year: 2025
title: "DeepSignV1: Pretrained Vision Transformer for Isolated Sign Language Recognition"
doi: "10.1109/RO-MAN63969.2025.11217895"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# DeepSignV1: Pretrained Vision Transformer for Isolated Sign Language Recognition

**Year:** [[2025]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Edmond Liu; Bruce A. MacDonald; Ho-Seok Ahn

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55604c7773a0c38a6811f6c4b94d882796d78f3a)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/RO-MAN63969.2025.11217895)

## Abstract

Isolated sign language recognition is a challenging task involving the learning of complex relationships between spatial and temporal features. Due to the high complexity and relatively small datasets available, state-of-the-art methods often adopt language modeling and convolutional neural network based multimodal designs, achieving high accuracy at the cost of significant architectural complexity. Conceptually simpler, transformers have gained widespread adoption in related computer vision tasks, outperforming 3D convolutional network competitors. However, due to a lack of training data, video transformers struggle with sign language recognition and have not demonstrated competitive accuracy compared to 3D convolutional neural network designs. We introduce DeepSign, a family of vision transformer based sign language recognition models with superior performance to 3D convolutional neural network designs. Through careful model ablation we select the UniFormerV2 and VideoMAE V2 architectures and perform mixture of dataset pretraining. Our strongest model DeepSign UniFormerV2-L achieves state-of-the-art on the WLASL100 and MSASL100 benchmarks, producing 92.64% and 94% top-1 accuracies respectively. Armed with VideoMAE V2’s powerful pretrained backbone, DeepSign ViT base offers greater efficiency for a small accuracy tradeoff. We hope DeepSign will help advance future sign language research by providing strong foundational models to kickstart experiments.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Liu2025DeepSignV1PV,
 author = {Edmond Liu and Bruce A. MacDonald and Ho-Seok Ahn},
 booktitle = {IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication},
 journal = {2025 34th IEEE International Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN)},
 pages = {2213-2218},
 title = {DeepSignV1: Pretrained Vision Transformer for Isolated Sign Language Recognition},
 year = {2025}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
