---
semanticScholarId: "6105c8371868e79251b832e3ff2ca8c5e62d4de2"
bibKey: null
year: 2024
title: "BTVSL: A Novel Sentence-Level Annotated Dataset for Bangla Sign Language Translation"
doi: "10.1109/FG59268.2024.10581873"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# BTVSL: A Novel Sentence-Level Annotated Dataset for Bangla Sign Language Translation

**Year:** [[2024]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Iftekhar E. Mahbub Zeeon; Mirzaei Mohammad; Muhammad Abdullah Adnan

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6105c8371868e79251b832e3ff2ca8c5e62d4de2)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/FG59268.2024.10581873)

## Abstract

Sign language, a vital communication tool for individuals with hearing impairments worldwide, is prominently utilized within the BangIa-speaking community. BangIa is recognized as the seventh most spoken language globally. However, research in BangIa Sign Language Recognition (SLR) - the process of translating symbols or words from images and videos - has been predominantly confined to controlled environments with limited samples and rudimentary symbol annotations, impeding its application in real-world scenarios. In contrast to previous studies, our research concentrates on SLR. It delves into the relatively unexplored territories of BangIa Sign Language Translation (SLT) and Sign Language Production (SLP), areas that have been largely overlooked due to dataset constraints. We introduce BTVSL, a comprehensive BangIa Sign Language dataset derived from the YouTube series ‘BTV Desh o Jonopoder Khobor'. This dataset, featuring 60 hours of news content in sign language delivered by professionals, represents the largest sentence-level dataset available for BangIa SLT, encompassing a broad spectrum of expressions. Leveraging BTVSL, we evaluated four distinct SLT models, achieving an average BLEU score of 20.42. This result underscores the potential of BTVSL in enhancing the accuracy of sign language translation.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Zeeon2024BTVSLAN,
 author = {Iftekhar E. Mahbub Zeeon and Mirzaei Mohammad and Muhammad Abdullah Adnan},
 booktitle = {IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture Recognition},
 journal = {2024 IEEE 18th International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG)},
 pages = {1-10},
 title = {BTVSL: A Novel Sentence-Level Annotated Dataset for Bangla Sign Language Translation},
 year = {2024}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
