---
semanticScholarId: "6351ebb4a3287f5f3e1273464b3b91e5df5a16d7"
bibKey: null
year: 2021
title: "Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners"
doi: "10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01553"
arxivId: "2111.06377"
isSignLanguage: false
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners

**Year:** [[2021]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Kaiming He; Xinlei Chen; Saining Xie; Yanghao Li; Piotr Doll'ar; Ross B. Girshick

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6351ebb4a3287f5f3e1273464b3b91e5df5a16d7)
- [PDF](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2111.06377)
- [arXiv:2111.06377](https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.06377)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01553)

## Abstract

This paper shows that masked autoencoders (MAE) are scalable self-supervised learners for computer vision. Our MAE approach is simple: we mask random patches of the input image and reconstruct the missing pixels. It is based on two core designs. First, we develop an asymmetric encoder-decoder architecture, with an encoder that operates only on the visible subset of patches (without mask tokens), along with a lightweight decoder that reconstructs the original image from the latent representation and mask tokens. Second, we find that masking a high proportion of the input image, e.g., 75%, yields a nontrivial and meaningful self-supervisory task. Coupling these two designs enables us to train large models efficiently and effectively: we accelerate training (by 3× or more) and improve accuracy. Our scalable approach allows for learning high-capacity models that generalize well: e.g., a vanilla ViT-Huge model achieves the best accuracy (87.8%) among methods that use only ImageNet-1K data. Transfer performance in downstream tasks outperforms supervised pretraining and shows promising scaling behavior.

## TL;DR

This paper develops an asymmetric encoder-decoder architecture, with an encoder that operates only on the visible subset of patches (without mask tokens), along with a lightweight decoder that reconstructs the original image from the latent representation and mask tokens.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{He2021MaskedAA,
 author = {Kaiming He and Xinlei Chen and Saining Xie and Yanghao Li and Piotr Doll'ar and Ross B. Girshick},
 booktitle = {Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition},
 journal = {2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)},
 pages = {15979-15988},
 title = {Masked Autoencoders Are Scalable Vision Learners},
 year = {2021}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
