---
semanticScholarId: "81292097d38b5d6622d606f4965806313e296d0d"
bibKey: null
year: 2025
title: "The TUB Sign Language Corpus Collection"
doi: "10.1145/3742886.3756709"
arxivId: "2508.05374"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "ar5iv"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: ar5iv
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# The TUB Sign Language Corpus Collection

**Year:** [[2025]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Eleftherios Avramidis; Vera Czehmann; Fabian Deckert; Lorenz Hufe; Aljoscha Lipski; Yuni Amaloa Quintero Villalobos; Tae Kwon Rhee; Mengqian Shi; Lennart Stolting; Fabrizio Nunnari; Sebastian Moller

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81292097d38b5d6622d606f4965806313e296d0d)
- [arXiv:2508.05374](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.05374)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1145/3742886.3756709)

## Abstract

We present a collection of parallel corpora of 12 sign languages in video format, together with subtitles in the dominant spoken languages of the corresponding countries. The entire collection includes more than 1,300 hours in 4,381 video files, accompanied by 1,3 M subtitles containing 14 M tokens. Most notably, it includes the first consistent parallel corpora for 8 Latin American sign languages, whereas the size of the German Sign Language corpora is ten times the size of the previously available corpora. The collection was created by collecting and processing videos of multiple sign languages from various online sources, mainly broadcast material of news shows, governmental bodies and educational channels. The preparation involved several stages, including data collection, informing the content creators and seeking usage approvals, scraping, and cropping. The paper provides statistics on the collection and an overview of the methods used to collect the data.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Book{Avramidis2025TheTS,
 author = {Eleftherios Avramidis and Vera Czehmann and Fabian Deckert and Lorenz Hufe and Aljoscha Lipski and Yuni Amaloa Quintero Villalobos and Tae Kwon Rhee and Mengqian Shi and Lennart Stolting and Fabrizio Nunnari and Sebastian Moller},
 booktitle = {International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents},
 journal = {Adjunct Proceedings of the 25th ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents},
 title = {The TUB Sign Language Corpus Collection},
 year = {2025}
}
```

## Full Text

# The TUB Sign Language Corpus Collection

Eleftherios Avramidis [0000-0002-5671-573X](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5671-573X) German Research Center for AI (DFKI) Speech and Language Technology Berlin Germany [eleftherios.avramidis@dfki.de](mailto:eleftherios.avramidis@dfki.de) , Vera Czehmann [0009-0004-8007-6503](https://orcid.org/0009-0004-8007-6503) German Research Center for AI (DFKI) Speech and Language Technology Berlin Germany Technische Universität Berlin Berlin Germany [vera.czehmann@dfki.de](mailto:vera.czehmann@dfki.de) , Fabian Deckert [0009-0003-5281-8226](https://orcid.org/0009-0003-5281-8226) Technische Universität Berlin Berlin Germany [fabian.deckert@campus.tu-berlin.de](mailto:fabian.deckert@campus.tu-berlin.de) , Lorenz Hufe [0009-0000-4368-4877](https://orcid.org/0009-0000-4368-4877) Fraunhofer HHI Berlin Germany Bliss e.V. Berlin Germany [lorenz.hufe@hhi.fraunhofer.de](mailto:lorenz.hufe@hhi.fraunhofer.de) , Aljoscha Lipski [0009-0007-8672-6556](https://orcid.org/0009-0007-8672-6556) Technische Universität Berlin Berlin Germany [aljoscha.lipski@googlemail.com](mailto:aljoscha.lipski@googlemail.com) , Yuni Amaloa Quintero Villalobos [0000-0002-8569-1108](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8569-1108) Technische Universität Berlin Berlin Germany [quintero.villalobos@campus.tu-berlin.de](mailto:quintero.villalobos@campus.tu-berlin.de) , Tae Kwon Rhee [0009-0001-0711-660X](https://orcid.org/0009-0001-0711-660X) Technische Universität Berlin Berlin Germany [tae.k.rhee@campus.tu-berlin.de](mailto:tae.k.rhee@campus.tu-berlin.de) , Mengqian Shi [0009-0005-8244-1735](https://orcid.org/0009-0005-8244-1735) Technische Universität Berlin Berlin Germany [mengqian.shi@campus.tu-berlin.de](mailto:mengqian.shi@campus.tu-berlin.de) , Lennart Stölting [0009-0009-1104-0693](https://orcid.org/0009-0009-1104-0693) Technische Universität Berlin Berlin Germany [l.stoelting@campus.tu-berlin.de](mailto:l.stoelting@campus.tu-berlin.de) , Fabrizio Nunnari [0000-0002-1596-4043](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1596-4043) German Research Center for AI (DFKI) Cognitive Assistants Saarbrücken Germany [fabrizio.nunnari@dfki.de](mailto:fabrizio.nunnari@dfki.de) and Sebastian Möller [0000-0003-3057-0760](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3057-0760) Technische Universität Berlin Berlin Germany German Research Center for AI (DFKI) Speech and Language Technology Berlin Germany [sebastian.moeller@tu-berlin.de](mailto:sebastian.moeller@tu-berlin.de)

(2025)

###### Abstract.

We present a collection of parallel corpora of 12 sign languages in video format, together with subtitles in the dominant spoken languages of the corresponding countries.

The entire collection includes more than 1,300 hours in 4,381 video files, accompanied by 1,3 M subtitles containing 14 M tokens.

Most notably, it includes the first consistent parallel corpora for 8 Latin American sign languages, whereas the size of the German Sign Language corpora is ten times the size of the previously available corpora.

The collection was created by collecting and processing videos of multiple sign languages from various online sources, mainly broadcast material of news shows, governmental bodies and educational channels.

The preparation involved several stages, including data collection, informing the content creators and seeking usage approvals, scraping, and cropping.

The paper provides statistics on the collection and an overview of the methods used to collect the data.

sign language, parallel corpora, German Sign Language, Peruvian Sign Language, Costa Rican Sign Language, Colombian Sign Language, Chilean Sign Language, Argentinian Sign Language, Mexican Sign Language

† † journalyear: 2025 † † copyright: cc † † conference: ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents; September 16-19, 2025; Berlin, Germany † † booktitle: ACM International Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA Adjunct '25), September 16-19, 2025, Berlin, Germany † † doi: 10.1145/3742886.3756709 † † isbn: 979-8-4007-1996-7/2025/09 † † submissionid: 37 † † ccs: Computing methodologies Machine translation † † ccs: Computing methodologies Natural language processing † † ccs: Applied computing Language translation † † ccs: Computing methodologies Computer vision tasks † † ccs: Computing methodologies Language resources † † ccs: Human-centered computing Accessibility systems and tools

## 1. Introduction

Language technology has made enormous progress over the last decade, resulting in several popular and helpful products and services.

However, it should be noted that while this progress has been observed for spoken languages, progress with regard to technology for sign languages has been limited.

As sign languages are the primary means of communication for deaf and many hard-of-hearing individuals, this lack of progress means that approximately half a billion people worldwide have fewer opportunities to experience the benefits of language technology, and therefore are disadvantaged with regard to communication and access to information and knowledge.

It should also be noted that for most sign language users, written language is a second language. This can lead to difficulties accessing most online content, which is predominantly textual, and limits benefits from text-based technologies.

We therefore believe that it is the responsibility of the language technology research community to encourage and empower research into relevant developments for sign languages, with the aim of increasing accessibility and lowering communication barriers around the world.

A crucial element in the progress of language technology for spoken languages has been the focus on collecting and curating language corpora. This has facilitated research in fields such as computational linguistics and natural language processing . More recently, the conception and use of data-intensive empirical methods and machine learning has unlocked great potential in terms of functionality and applications, but this has depended on the availability of large amounts of corpora.

These corpora are predominantly textual and usually originate from publicly available web data that have been pre-processed and curated for specific tasks.

A relevant subcategory of these corpora are the so-called parallel corpora , i.e. collections of content expressed in two or more languages in a way that can be aligned, allowing training of machine learning models for multilingual tasks, such as machine translation, multilingual summarization etc..

Unlike spoken languages, almost all sign languages suffer from a lack of corpora.

We believe this is one of the reasons why the research and development of sign language technologies has been limited.

Although significant efforts have been made in recent years, with several datasets being released, these still only cover a few sign languages and are nowhere near what is required to train large-scale models similar to those available for spoken languages.

In an effort to improve this situation, we present the TUB sign language corpus collection: a set of parallel corpora sourced from the web containing videos of various sign languages alongside textual transcriptions of the dominant spoken languages of the countries where the respective SLs are used.

The important contributions of this collection are the following:

- • the entire collection comprises 1,391 hours of continuous sign language videos, totalling 440 GB across 4,381 files,
- • the videos are accompanied by 1,335,320 timed closed captions (subtitles) in the respective spoken language (manually or automatically generated), in overall including 14 M tokens,
- • the corpora are manually collected from internet sources by 8 native speakers of the respective spoken languages,
- • the licences of the content have been verified, the content creators have been informed, and additional permissions have been sought and obtained by the majority of them,
- • the vast majority of the content consists of the interpretation of spoken televised or streamed content,
- • the content mostly falls in the domains of news reporting, government announcements and educational material
- • it includes the first parallel corpora of continuous sign language for 8 sign languages of Latin America.

The collection is available open source in form of a catalogue, which is licensed under the MIT licence 1 1 1 [https://github.com/DFKI-SignLanguage/TUB-Sign-Language-Corpus-Collection](https://github.com/DFKI-SignLanguage/TUB-Sign-Language-Corpus-Collection) .

The rest of the paper is structured as follows:

In

[Section 2](#S2) we provide an overview of the state-of-the-art sign language corpora and outline how our work compares to them.

The construction of the collection is detailed in

[Section 3](#S3) .

The content of the collection is described in

[Section 4](#S4) whereas our view on the limitations is given in [Section 5](#S5) and a conclusion is provided in [Section 6](#S6) .

## 2. Related Work

In this section we provide an overview of the state-of-the-art corpora for the sign languages included in our collection. An overview is given in [Table 1](#S1.T1) .

YouTube-SL-25 (Tanzer and Zhang, [2024](#bib.bib25) ) is the biggest and most multilingual parallel corpus between sign language videos with spoken language text.

It contains solid representation of 25 languages and amounts to 3,207 hours of content.

Our effort is similar to this corpus in that it contains content from multiple sign languages from around the world, as well as a large number of videos sourced from YouTube.

One major difference is that, whereas the YouTube-SL-25 videos were selected using an automatic classifier, our videos were manually handpicked.

In addition to what is provided by YouTube-SL-25, our collection includes extensive metadata containing licence information and domain labels. We have also communicated with the content creators to inform them about the data collection and obtain additional permissions.

Finally, we can confirm that the YouTube videos referred to by our collection do not overlap with those included in YouTube-SL-25.

One of the most used sign languages, American Sign Language (ASL) , has the largest amount of available continuous sign language corpora.

The largest such corpus is YouTube-ASL (Tanzer and Zhang,

[2024](#bib.bib25) ) , providing 1,000 hours of signed content, sourced from YouTube, as a predecessor of YouTube-SL-25.

The next largest dataset of considerable size is How2Sign (Duarte et al.,

[2021](#bib.bib9) ) , comprising a vocabulary of 16k tokens and 79 hours of video.

It features 11 signers and provides loosely aligned sentence-level transcriptions, gloss-level transcriptions, OpenPose keypoints, depth camera images, and speech tracks from the video sources.

The FLEURS-ASL (Tanzer,

[2025](#bib.bib24) ) corpus comprises approximately 15 hours of sign language video data and is primarily intended for benchmarking MT models that translate ASL to text of the spoken languages included in FLEURS (Conneau et al., [2023](#bib.bib7) ) and FLORES (Goyal et al., [2022](#bib.bib12) ) .

German Sign Language (DGS) has the following available continuous sign language corpora.

The DGS-Corpus (Hanke et al.,

[2020](#bib.bib14) ) consists of 50 hours of original content expressed in DGS.

The corpus has been collected by 330 participants across Germany and is intended for linguistic usage.

RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather (Forster et al.,

[2012](#bib.bib11) ) has been used as a benchmark for machine translation from sign to text, despite having received criticism for its quality (De Sisto et al., [2022](#bib.bib8) ) .

The videos were derived from the weather forecast of the German public TV broadcasting service PHOENIX and have a resolution of 210x260 pixels, accumulating to 3.25 hours of content.

DGS-Fabeln-1 (Nunnari et al.,

[2024](#bib.bib20) ) is a parallel corpus of German text and videos containing German fairy tales interpreted into DGS by a native DGS signer.

The corpus is filmed from 7 angles and contains 573 segments of videos with a total duration of 1 hour and 32 minutes, corresponding to 1,428 written sentences.

The size of the DGS parallel corpora that are included in our collection is ten times the size of the DGS corpora available so far.

For French Sign Language (LSF), Matignon-LSF (Halbout et al., [2024](#bib.bib13) ) is a 39-hour corpus of interpreted government speeches, featuring aligned LSF videos with French audio/subtitles.

Dicta-Sign-LSF-v2 (Belissen et al.,

[2020](#bib.bib2) ) contains 11-hour travel-themed dialogues with 18 signers with annotation on both lexical and non-lexical signs.

MEDIAPI-SKEL (Bull et al.,

[2020](#bib.bib5) ) contains 27 hours of video of body, face and hand keypoints of originally-signed sign language, aligned to subtitles.

Rosetta-LSF (Bertin-Lemée et al.,

[2022](#bib.bib3) ) focuses on text-to-sign translation through virtual signers and aligns French news headlines with LSF videos and AZee formal representations.

For Spanish Sign Language (LSE), the corpus that stands out is CORLSE (Saiz and García,

[2023](#bib.bib23) ) with over 380 hours of continuous LSE video recordings, featuring naturalistic and semi-structured discourse from more than 200 deaf signers from diverse regions across Spain.

The KSL dataset (Hong et al.,

[2018](#bib.bib15) ) is the biggest representant of Korean Sign Language and contains 90 hours of 3-camera recordings of discussions, stories, and lexical elicitation.

For Latin American sign languages included in our collection, to the best of our knowledge, there is no consistent parallel corpus of continuous sign language.

Small corpora for isolated signs or focused linguistic studies are available for the sign languages of Argentina (Ronchetti et al.,

[2016](#bib.bib22) ; Massone and Curiel, [2004](#bib.bib16) ) , Chile (Morales Acosta and Lattapiat Navarro, [2024](#bib.bib17) ) , Colombia (Felipe Flórez-Sierra et al., [2024](#bib.bib10) ) , Costa Rica (Naranjo-Zeledón et al., [2020](#bib.bib19) ) and Mexico (Trujillo-Romero and García-Bautista, [2023](#bib.bib26) ) .

To the best of our knowledge, no resources exist for the sign languages of Ecuador, Nicaragua and Peru.

## 3. Construction of the Corpus Collection

The construction of the corpus collection consisted of the manual search for the sources, the collection of the licensing information and the processing of the content.

### 3.1. Manual Search of Sign Language Sources

The sign language content used for this corpus was manually collected by eight hearing individuals, all native speakers of the languages they were responsible for.

This group included native speakers of French, German, Korean and Spanish from Latin America.

Having speakers of the spoken language conduct the search process was crucial, as they could more easily allocate and identify signed content relating to politics, academia or the news, or specific types of videos, using keywords (e.g. 'Cadena' for Spanish, meaning 'National Transmission').

Their familiarity with linguistic and cultural context allowed for more targeted and effective search queries.

It is important to note that, although some countries share the same spoken language, such as the United States of America and United Kingdom with English, for example, the SLs used in each country differ. For instance, ASL is used in the United States of America, while BSL (British Sign Language) is used in the United Kingdom. The same applies to Spanish-speaking countries such as Spain and Latin America. Each country in Latin America has its own official sign language: For example, LSM is used in Mexico, LSA in Argentina and LSCh in Chile. The same pattern applies to the SLs of Arabic- and Portuguese-speaking countries.

A significant portion of the search was conducted on the media platform YouTube, which has an interface that allows users to search for videos by topic or channel and apply filters such as the presence of subtitles or closed captions, and whether they are licensed under Creative Commons.

This was helpful for clarifying licence requirements, which will be explained later.

Nowadays, it is common for news and government channels to include a sign language interpreter, so these were also searched for.

These videos either show the interpreter in one of the lower corners of the screen or alongside the person speaking.

However, not all videos from news or government channels include a sign language interpreter, so an extensive search was necessary.

In some cases, we created custom YouTube playlists to isolate sign language videos from channels with a wider range of content.

### 3.2. Collecting Licensing Information

The vision behind creating this collection was to make the corpora as freely and publicly available as possible.

Therefore, as previously mentioned, the initial search focused on online sources that publish content under permissive licences.

Secondly, we verified the licences of the videos as they were collected individually.

Finally, we communicated with the content creators, providing them with a detailed description of our project and its purposes.

This enabled us to obtain informed consent for the data collection and additionally resulted in positive permissions being granted, which were not initially available.

The collected corpora are covered by the licences of public domain , creative commons , YouTube standard license , permission for research usage , and permission for research usage after keypoint extraction .

### 3.3. Processing of content

Subtitles had to be extracted from videos in order to calculate spoken language statistics and include them in the metadata.

In some cases, optical character recognition (OCR) was used to extract subtitles that were part of the video.

A sentence and word tokeniser was used to tokenise the subtitle text.

Videos were often cropped to isolate the interpreter when they were blended into part of the screen during spoken shows.

Cropping the interpreter enables the resolution of the signed content to be calculated, which is a useful technical quality indicator.

## 4. Description of the Corpora

Here we will provide details about the metadata catalogue, statistics on the data and content characteristics of the videos.

### 4.1. Catalogue of Metadata

Following previous work, and due to redistribution restrictions on a substantial portion of the collection, we provide the URL addresses together with extensive metadata.

The catalogue of the metadata is provided in two levels:

#### Channel list.

The first metadata CSV table lists the channels (i.e. content sources), with one row per channel.

Aggregated metadata are provided for each channel, including information on the sign language covered, the licence, the total length and size of videos, the number of subtitles, and the number of sentences, tokens and characters they contain. The time period during which the original material was released is also provided.

#### Video list.

The videos are listed in a CSV table for each collection. There is one row for each file, which is identified by an incremental ID and accompanied by the relevant video file metadata ( [Table 2](#S3.T2) ).

The first part of the metadata provides a description of the video's basic characteristics, including the video name, website and video URLs, and the release date.

This is followed by technical details such as resolution, video length, frequency in frames per second (FPS), date of acquisition, and file size.

The final section refers to the associated content in the relevant spoken language (if available), as well as the number of subtitles, sentences, tokens and characters.

### 4.2. Data overview

An overview of the size of the corpora for every language is provided in [Table 3](#S3.T3) .

The corpus collection consists of 4,381 videos in 12 sign languages.

The most represented spoken-sign language pairs in terms of video duration are those from Germany, Peru, Costa Rica and Colombia.

The second overview in [Table 4](#S4.T4) provides details on the content sources that have been included in the corpus for each language.

It is also possible to view additional details here, such as the domain to which each content source belongs.

### 4.3. Content types

The content sources are predominantly labelled with one of four content types:

#### Political Content

In terms of video length, political content such as press conferences, parliamentary sessions and official government communications constitutes the largest category in the corpus.

Videos from the German parliament (Bundestag) fall under this category, containing the majority of content in DGS. There are 388 videos in this category, with a combined length of 525 hours and half a million transcribed sentences.

This category also includes presidential speeches and government content from several Latin American countries and South Korea.

#### News Broadcasts

The news category originates from television broadcasts and includes, among others, the German news bulletin 'Heute Journal' (with an average length of 20 minutes), the Chilean news outlet 'Timeline Antofagasta', and the Ecuadorian Executive Branch Official Channel 'Tele Ciudadana'.

#### Educational Content

This category comprises various sources related to educational contexts.

These include educational institutions, such as universities, or organisations and channels that promote sign language learning.

Unlike the majority of videos in the corpus, which show interpreted content, this category also contains material that is originally produced in a sign language.

#### Social Content

This content refers to videos derived from social organizations, such as unions of the deaf and NGOs.

### 4.4. Subtitles

One of the core criteria for selecting videos is the availability of subtitles.

Subtitles are attached to videos linked by our metadata lists.

They are typically provided in VTT, SRT and XML formats (the latter of which allows for word-level segmentation of broader subtitle units).

There are two types of subtitles: those that have been manually created by transcribers and provided by the content providers, and those that have been auto-generated by the video platform.

Manually created subtitles are undoubtedly of a higher quality than automatically generated subtitles, which are created using automatic speech recognition and may contain errors.

Nevertheless, we believe that auto-generated subtitles are better than no subtitles, and therefore we include them in the collection.

However, their usability for relevant tasks must be assessed.

Information on whether the subtitles are manually or automatically generated is provided in the metadata of every channel.

For auto-generated subtitles, the number of sentences is not reported due to a lack of punctuation.

## 5. Limitations and Further Work

Although we performed careful manual selection and metadata annotation of the sign language videos, the vast majority of the process has been done by hearing persons, native speakers of the spoken languages on the textual side of the parallel corpora.

Despite our efforts, we could only include one signer of DGS but no signers of the other languages in the project.

This may entail issues for the identification of the sign languages, the quality of the closed captions, but also requires future circumspection about the compliance with FAIR and CARE principles (Carroll et al.,

[2020](#bib.bib6) ; Wilkinson et al., [2016](#bib.bib27) ) with regard to the local signing communities.

Efforts should be made in further work, and as we did not have access to local communities during the development of the collection, we kindly invite them to engage with the open source content towards its improvement.

As in most interpreted content, the subtitles provided are a transcription of the spoken content and not the sign language.

As the subtitles and the sign language interpretation have been produced most probably independent of each other, based on the spoken content, there may be considerable deviations between the two.

An isolated portion of the screen which contains the signing person is not provided in the current version due to licence limitations.

We aim to provide co-ordinates and scripts in future updates.

An additional challenge is the timely alignment of the subtitles with the signed content, due to the inevitable variable delay introduced during interpretation.

This issue may need to be addressed with further technical means such as segmentation (Moryossef et al.,

[2023](#bib.bib18) ; Renz et al., [2021](#bib.bib21) ) or automatic shifting of the subtitles to match the signed content (Bull et al., [2021](#bib.bib4) ) .

We intend to address this limitation in further versions of our corpus.

## 6. Conclusion

The TUB Sign Language Corpus Collection represents a significant step toward the development of multilingual sign language resources by assembling a large-scale, diverse, and richly annotated dataset of signed videos and corresponding spoken language subtitles.

With over 1,300 hours of video across 12 sign languages and extensive metadata, the collection aims to provide a valuable foundation for further research on sign language technology.

Future work will focus on increasing the data and their availability, improving temporal alignment, and enhancing community engagement, to better serve both scientific and signing communities.

###### Acknowledgements.

The work reported in this paper was conducted as part of the module "Interdisciplinary Media Project" at the Quality and Usability Lab of the Technical University of Berlin. It was supported by BMBF (German Federal Ministry of Education and Research) via the project SocialWear (grant no. 01IW20002) and by the European Union via the project SignReality, as part of financial support to third parties by the UTTER project (Horizon Europe, GA: 101070631). Thanks to Laura Schowe and Ahmed Boulila for their participation in the initial corpus collection efforts.

## References

- (1)
- Belissen et al. (2020) Valentin Belissen, Annelies Braffort, and Michèle Gouiffès. 2020. Dicta-Sign-LSF-v2: Remake of a Continuous French Sign Language Dialogue Corpus and a First Baseline for Automatic Sign Language Processing. In *Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference* , Nicoletta Calzolari, Frédéric Béchet, Philippe Blache, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Hélène Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis (Eds.). European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France, 6040-6048. [https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.740/](https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.740/)
- Bertin-Lemée et al. (2022) Elise Bertin-Lemée, Annelies Braffort, Camille Challant, Claire Danet, Boris Dauriac, Michael Filhol, Emmanuella Martinod, and Jérémie Segouat. 2022. Rosetta-LSF: An Aligned Corpus of French Sign Language and French for Text-to-Sign Translation. In *Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference* , Nicoletta Calzolari, Frédéric Béchet, Philippe Blache, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Hélène Mazo, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis (Eds.). European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France, 4955-4962. [https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.529/](https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.529/)
- Bull et al. (2021) Hannah Bull, Triantafyllos Afouras, Gül Varol, Samuel Albanie, Liliane Momeni, and Andrew Zisserman. 2021. Aligning Subtitles in Sign Language Videos. *Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision* (May 2021), 11532-11541. [doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.01135](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.01135) arXiv:2105.02877
- Bull et al. (2020) Hannah Bull, Annelies Braffort, and Michèle Gouiffès. 2020. MEDIAPI-SKEL - A 2D-Skeleton Video Database of French Sign Language With Aligned French Subtitles. In *Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference* , Nicoletta Calzolari, Frédéric Béchet, Philippe Blache, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Hélène Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, and Stelios Piperidis (Eds.). European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France, 6063-6068. [https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.743/](https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.743/)
- Carroll et al. (2020) Stephanie Russo Carroll, Ibrahim Garba, Oscar L. Figueroa-Rodríguez, Jarita Holbrook, Raymond Lovett, Simeon Materechera, Mark Parsons, Kay Raseroka, Desi Rodriguez-Lonebear, Robyn Rowe, Rodrigo Sara, Jennifer D. Walker, Jane Anderson, and Maui Hudson. 2020. The CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance. *Data Science Journal* 19 (Nov. 2020), 43-43. [doi: 10.5334/dsj-2020-043](https://doi.org/10.5334/dsj-2020-043)
- Conneau et al. (2023) Alexis Conneau, Min Ma, Simran Khanuja, Yu Zhang, Vera Axelrod, Siddharth Dalmia, Jason Riesa, Clara Rivera, and Ankur Bapna. 2023. FLEURS: FEW-Shot Learning Evaluation of Universal Representations of Speech. In *2022 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT)* . 798-805. [doi: 10.1109/SLT54892.2023.10023141](https://doi.org/10.1109/SLT54892.2023.10023141)
- De Sisto et al. (2022) Mirella De Sisto, Vincent Vandeghinste, Santiago Egea Gómez, Mathieu De Coster, Dimitar Shterionov, and Horacio Saggion. 2022. Challenges with Sign Language Datasets for Sign Language Recognition and Translation. In *Proceedings of the Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference* . European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France, 2478-2487. [https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.264](https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.264)
- Duarte et al. (2021) Amanda Duarte, Shruti Palaskar, Lucas Ventura, Deepti Ghadiyaram, Kenneth DeHaan, Florian Metze, Jordi Torres, and Xavier Giro-i Nieto. 2021. How2sign: a large-scale multimodal dataset for continuous american sign language. In *Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition* . 2735-2744.
- Felipe Flórez-Sierra et al. (2024) Andrés Felipe Flórez-Sierra, Brayan David Solórzano, Fredy Segura-Quijano, Yenny Milena Cortés-Bello, Luis Cubillos, Luis Felipe Giraldo, and Christian Cifuentes-De la Portilla. 2024. LSC50: Colombian Sign Language Video and Inertial Measurement Dataset. *Scientific Data* 11, 1 (Dec. 2024), 1347. [doi: 10.1038/s41597-024-04172-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-024-04172-5)
- Forster et al. (2012) Jens Forster, Christoph Schmidt, Thomas Hoyoux, Oscar Koller, Uwe Zelle, Justus H Piater, and Hermann Ney. 2012. RWTH-PHOENIX-weather: A large vocabulary sign language recognition and translation corpus.. In *LREC* , Vol. 9. 3785-3789.
- Goyal et al. (2022) Naman Goyal, Cynthia Gao, Vishrav Chaudhary, Peng-Jen Chen, Guillaume Wenzek, Da Ju, Sanjana Krishnan, Marc'Aurelio Ranzato, Francisco Guzmán, and Angela Fan. 2022. The Flores-101 Evaluation Benchmark for Low-Resource and Multilingual Machine Translation. *Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics* 10 (2022), 522-538. [doi: 10.1162/tacl\_a\_00474](https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00474)
- Halbout et al. (2024) Julie Halbout, Diandra Fabre, Yanis Ouakrim, Julie Lascar, Annelies Braffort, Michèle Gouiffès, and Denis Beautemps. 2024. Matignon-LSF: A Large Corpus of Interpreted French Sign Language. In *Proceedings of the LREC-COLING 2024 11th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Evaluation of Sign Language Resources* , ELRA Language Resources Association (ELRA) and the International Committee on Computational Linguistics (ICCL) (Eds.). Turin, Italy, 202-208. [https://hal.science/hal-04593865](https://hal.science/hal-04593865)
- Hanke et al. (2020) Thomas Hanke, Marc Schulder, Reiner Konrad, and Elena Jahn. 2020. Extending the Public DGS Corpus in size and depth. In *sign-lang@ LREC 2020* . European Language Resources Association (ELRA), 75-82.
- Hong et al. (2018) Sung-Eun Hong, Seongok Won, Il Heo, and Hyunhwa Lee. 2018. Development of an "Integrative System for Korean Sign Language Resources". In *Sign-Lang@ LREC 2018* . European Language Resources Association (ELRA), 75-78. [http://lrec-conf.org/workshops/lrec2018/W1/pdf/18031\_W1.pdf](http://lrec-conf.org/workshops/lrec2018/W1/pdf/18031_W1.pdf)
- Massone and Curiel (2004) Maria Ignacia Massone and Monica Curiel. 2004. Sign Order in Argentine Sign Language. *Sign Language Studies* 5, 1 (2004), 63-93. [doi: 10.1353/sls.2004.0023](https://doi.org/10.1353/sls.2004.0023)
- Morales Acosta and Lattapiat Navarro (2024) Gina Viviana Morales Acosta and Pamela Lattapiat Navarro. 2024. Translation of a Story into Chilean Sign Language: Productions by Deaf Co-Teachers. *Frontiers in Education* 9 (Oct. 2024). [doi: 10.3389/feduc.2024.1368082](https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2024.1368082)
- Moryossef et al. (2023) Amit Moryossef, Zifan Jiang, Mathias Müller, Sarah Ebling, and Yoav Goldberg. 2023. Linguistically Motivated Sign Language Segmentation. [doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.13960](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.13960) arXiv:2310.13960 [cs]
- Naranjo-Zeledón et al. (2020) Luis Naranjo-Zeledón, Mario Chacón-Rivas, Jesús Peral, and Antonio Ferrández. 2020. Phonological Proximity in Costa Rican Sign Language. *Electronics* 9, 8 (Aug. 2020), 1302. [doi: 10.3390/electronics9081302](https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics9081302)
- Nunnari et al. (2024) Fabrizio Nunnari, Eleftherios Avramidis, Cristina España-Bonet, Marco González, Anna Hennes, and Patrick Gebhard. 2024. DGS-Fabeln-1: A Multi-Angle Parallel Corpus of Fairy Tales between German Sign Language and German Text. In *Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024)* , Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique Hoste, Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue (Eds.). ELRA and ICCL, Torino, Italia, 4847-4857. [https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.434](https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.434)
- Renz et al. (2021) Katrin Renz, Nicolaj C. Stache, Samuel Albanie, and G¨ul Varol. 2021. Sign Language Segmentation with Temporal Convolutional Networks. *ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing - Proceedings* 2021-June (2021), 2135-2139. [doi: 10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9413817](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9413817) arXiv:2011.12986
- Ronchetti et al. (2016) Franco Ronchetti, Facundo Quiroga, César Armando Estrebou, Laura Cristina Lanzarini, and Alejandro Rosete. 2016. LSA64: an Argentinian sign language dataset. In *XXII Congreso Argentino de Ciencias de la Computación (CACIC 2016).*
- Saiz and García (2023) María Luz Esteban Saiz and Saúl Villameriel García. 2023. *Informe Corpus de la Lengua de Signos Española (CORLSE): El desafío de documentar una lengua visual* . Publicaciones Oficiales de la Administración General del Estado, Madrid. [https://www.corpuslse.es/corlse/consulta-y-acceso/informe\_sociolinguistico\_corlse\_2023.pdf](https://www.corpuslse.es/corlse/consulta-y-acceso/informe_sociolinguistico_corlse_2023.pdf)
- Tanzer (2025) Garrett Tanzer. 2025. FLEURS-ASL: Including American Sign Language in Massively Multilingual Multitask Evaluation. In *Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers)* , Luis Chiruzzo, Alan Ritter, and Lu Wang (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 6167-6191. [doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-long.314](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2025.naacl-long.314)
- Tanzer and Zhang (2024) Garrett Tanzer and Biao Zhang. 2024. YouTube-SL-25: A Large-Scale, Open-Domain Multilingual Sign Language Parallel Corpus. [doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2407.11144](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.11144) arXiv:2407.11144
- Trujillo-Romero and García-Bautista (2023) Felipe Trujillo-Romero and Gibran García-Bautista. 2023. Mexican Sign Language Corpus: Towards an Automatic Translator. *ACM Trans. Asian Low-Resour. Lang. Inf. Process.* 22, 8 (Aug. 2023), 212:1-212:24. [doi: 10.1145/3591471](https://doi.org/10.1145/3591471)
- Wilkinson et al. (2016) Mark D. Wilkinson, Michel Dumontier, IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg, Gabrielle Appleton, Myles Axton, Arie Baak, Niklas Blomberg, Jan-Willem Boiten, Luiz Bonino Da Silva Santos, Philip E. Bourne, Jildau Bouwman, Anthony J. Brookes, Tim Clark, Mercè Crosas, Ingrid Dillo, Olivier Dumon, Scott Edmunds, Chris T. Evelo, Richard Finkers, Alejandra Gonzalez-Beltran, Alasdair J.G. Gray, Paul Groth, Carole Goble, Jeffrey S. Grethe, Jaap Heringa, Peter A.C 'T Hoen, Rob Hooft, Tobias Kuhn, Ruben Kok, Joost Kok, Scott J. Lusher, Maryann E. Martone, Albert Mons, Abel L. Packer, Bengt Persson, Philippe Rocca-Serra, Marco Roos, Rene Van Schaik, Susanna-Assunta Sansone, Erik Schultes, Thierry Sengstag, Ted Slater, George Strawn, Morris A. Swertz, Mark Thompson, Johan Van Der Lei, Erik Van Mulligen, Jan Velterop, Andra Waagmeester, Peter Wittenburg, Katherine Wolstencroft, Jun Zhao, and Barend Mons. 2016. The FAIR Guiding Principles for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship. *Scientific Data* 3, 1 (March 2016), 160018. [doi: 10.1038/sdata.2016.18](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18)

## References

- [[bcf4df255deb3085c2b4222d6079129c4c6255c9]] — LSC50: Colombian Sign Language Video and Inertial Measurement dataset (2024)
- [[82a7eeb46837d8c420500d23633912fd6a3dabda]] — Translation of a story into Chilean Sign Language: productions by deaf co-teachers (2024)
- [[236636d77a95b1dda141cb4c4df73e96e44c2e13]] — FLEURS-ASL: Including American Sign Language in Massively Multilingual Multitask Evaluation (2024)
- [[932156355ff5bba8fb8d75faef6ca36a1b91f575]] — YouTube-SL-25: A Large-Scale, Open-Domain Multilingual Sign Language Parallel Corpus (2024)
- [[649b86d31d8ae10cc973da90e1e672d09c174764]] — DGS-Fabeln-1: A Multi-Angle Parallel Corpus of Fairy Tales between German Sign Language and German Text (2024)
- [[869cf45c0c77db3f513e11770f33375c43c6d86a]] — Matignon-LSF: a Large Corpus of Interpreted French Sign Language (2024)
- [[f3c7313e929998845885a5512dc095929a847ba1]] — LSA64: An Argentinian Sign Language Dataset (2023)
- [[4acc7aa0e90905ed244f196453514eb70b80db94]] — Linguistically Motivated Sign Language Segmentation (2023)
- [[b114e1a72d94f28a57f2e2bb6e5d3fd4ddcacdb0]] — Mexican Sign Language Corpus: Towards an Automatic Translator (2023)
- [[7c73fe9266db0b35f551645ca37c6e7ce0980c4b]] — FLEURS: FEW-Shot Learning Evaluation of Universal Representations of Speech (2022)
- [[789b8487da7188442085983caba3ffaae05531e9]] — The Flores-101 Evaluation Benchmark for Low-Resource and Multilingual Machine Translation (2021)
- [[ad9d96b2871afed5c016f6da95da8cbb55e12bcd]] — Aligning Subtitles in Sign Language Videos (2021)
- [[7dbd6b630d37384c90b05ac3e05c2eeb88537fdd]] — Sign Language Segmentation with Temporal Convolutional Networks (2020)
- [[2b01e7dbaded2f74e39fe492ffda38d91c88d0e4]] — The CARE Principles for Indigenous Data Governance (2020)
- [[932168d1c27390506049adf679b42d3aac53f61c]] — How2Sign: A Large-scale Multimodal Dataset for Continuous American Sign Language (2020)
- [[d972cb9b1ced07ab69497ed4fe3ee9255c7fcc2e]] — Phonological Proximity in Costa Rican Sign Language (2020)
- [[ece525e16b7828e2b35d3b0f3cf199e0022d8775]] — MEDIAPI-SKEL - A 2D-Skeleton Video Database of French Sign Language With Aligned French Subtitles (2020)
- [[e89b06f0b04e77c93322fd15eb153cdab69ecacb]] — Dicta-Sign-LSF-v2: Remake of a Continuous French Sign Language Dialogue Corpus and a First Baseline for Automatic Sign Language Processing (2020)
- [[58cdf6a994558124d5c4f836473837e778530be2]] — Extending the Public DGS Corpus in Size and Depth (2020)
- [[e936f248b2c0489316ed1521656af2564c3502c3]] — The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management and stewardship (2016)
- [[29228179df78b2bc28c0c65cea2f1a43132993c6]] — RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather: A Large Vocabulary Sign Language Recognition and Translation Corpus (2012)
- [[5a949620186b34bb32d31ba53b34ab78200f631b]] — Sign Order in Argentine Sign Language (2004)
- [[9eb12b2ae507318956ee712d4cda53b7e7592ac2]] — Rosetta-LSF: an Aligned Corpus of French Sign Language and French for Text-to-Sign Translation (2022)
- Development of an “Integrative System for Korean Sign Language Resources” (2018)
- RichardFinkers (2016)
- 2023. Informe Corpus de la Lengua de Signos Española (CORLSE): El desafío de documentar una lengua visual . Publicaciones Oficiales de la Administración General del Es-tado, Madrid ()
- The TUB Sign Language Corpus Collection ()

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: ar5iv
- bibtex: semanticscholar
