---
semanticScholarId: "8662341e6e124cf7b207b9c7d7fdbe73fabbf530"
bibKey: null
year: 2021
title: "Fingerspelling Detection in American Sign Language"
doi: "10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00415"
arxivId: "2104.01291"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Fingerspelling Detection in American Sign Language

**Year:** [[2021]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Bowen Shi; D. Brentari; G. Shakhnarovich; Karen Livescu

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8662341e6e124cf7b207b9c7d7fdbe73fabbf530)
- [PDF](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2104.01291)
- [arXiv:2104.01291](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.01291)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00415)

## Abstract

Fingerspelling, in which words are signed letter by letter, is an important component of American Sign Language. Most previous work on automatic fingerspelling recognition has assumed that the boundaries of fingerspelling regions in signing videos are known beforehand. In this paper, we consider the task of fingerspelling detection in raw, untrimmed sign language videos. This is an important step towards building real-world fingerspelling recognition systems. We propose a benchmark and a suite of evaluation metrics, some of which reflect the effect of detection on the downstream fingerspelling recognition task. In addition, we propose a new model that learns to detect fingerspelling via multi-task training, incorporating pose estimation and fingerspelling recognition (transcription) along with detection, and compare this model to several alternatives. The model outperforms all alternative approaches across all metrics, establishing a state of the art on the benchmark.

## TL;DR

A new model is proposed that learns to detect fingerspelling via multi-task training, incorporating pose estimation and fingerspelling recognition along with detection, and this model outperforms all alternative approaches across all metrics, establishing a state of the art on the benchmark.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Shi2021FingerspellingDI,
 author = {Bowen Shi and D. Brentari and G. Shakhnarovich and Karen Livescu},
 booktitle = {Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition},
 journal = {2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)},
 pages = {4164-4173},
 title = {Fingerspelling Detection in American Sign Language},
 year = {2021}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
