---
semanticScholarId: "8cf3c9ea88d47704d6364641c66aadaa23f6cf36"
bibKey: "inoue-etal-2024-enhancing"
year: 2024
title: "Enhancing Syllabic Component Classification in Japanese Sign Language by Pre-training on Non-Japanese Sign Language Data"
doi: "10.63317/3om3rgzvhzd4"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: ours
---

# Enhancing Syllabic Component Classification in Japanese Sign Language by Pre-training on Non-Japanese Sign Language Data

**Year:** [[2024]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Jundai Inoue; Makoto Miwa; Yutaka Sasaki; Daisuke Hara

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8cf3c9ea88d47704d6364641c66aadaa23f6cf36)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.63317/3om3rgzvhzd4)
- [ACL Anthology](https://aclanthology.org/2024.signlang-1.13)

## Abstract

In sign languages, syllables are composed of syllabic components consisting of locations, movements, and handshapes; however, the rules of combinations of these syllabic components are still unclear. Decomposing existing syllables into syllabic components is necessary to clarify the rules. This study aims to construct an automatic syllabic component classification system for Japanese Sign Language (JSL) using deep learning. We propose a pre-training method using non-Japanese Sign Language data to achieve high performance in classifying syllabic components in a situation where the number of training JSL videos is limited. We also investigate multitask learning for syllabic component classification to share the information among the syllabic components. Experiments on the syllabic component classification for the dominant hand show that 1) pre-training with the American Sign Language (ASL) dataset improved classification performance for the movement and handshape components and 2) multitask learning did not contribute to the performance improvement of syllabic component classification. We also investigated the influence of pre-training on syllabic component classification by visualizing critical elements in videos to predict the components.

## TL;DR

This study proposes a pre-training method using non-Japanese Sign Language data to achieve high performance in classifying syllabic components in a situation where the number of training JSL videos is limited and investigates multitask learning for syllabic component classification to share the information among the syllabic components.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{inoue-etal-2024-enhancing,
 address = {Torino, Italia},
 author = {Inoue, Jundai  and
Miwa, Makoto  and
Sasaki, Yutaka  and
Hara, Daisuke},
 booktitle = {Proceedings of the LREC-COLING 2024 11th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Evaluation of Sign Language Resources},
 editor = {Efthimiou, Eleni  and
Fotinea, Stavroula-Evita  and
Hanke, Thomas  and
Hochgesang, Julie A.  and
Mesch, Johanna  and
Schulder, Marc},
 pages = {123--130},
 publisher = {ELRA and ICCL},
 title = {Enhancing Syllabic Component Classification in {J}apanese {S}ign {L}anguage by Pre-training on Non-{J}apanese {S}ign {L}anguage Data},
 url = {https://aclanthology.org/2024.signlang-1.13},
 year = {2024}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: ours
