---
semanticScholarId: "91a8da0d5429b0be63b2495587908d4583931ab5"
bibKey: "huang2019attention3DCNNsSLR"
year: 2019
title: "Attention-Based 3D-CNNs for Large-Vocabulary Sign Language Recognition"
doi: "10.1109/TCSVT.2018.2870740"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: ours
---

# Attention-Based 3D-CNNs for Large-Vocabulary Sign Language Recognition

**Year:** [[2019]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Jie Huang; Wen-gang Zhou; Houqiang Li; Weiping Li

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/91a8da0d5429b0be63b2495587908d4583931ab5)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2018.2870740)

## Abstract

Sign language recognition (SLR) is an important and challenging research topic in the multimedia field. Conventional techniques for SLR rely on hand-crafted features, which achieve limited success. In this paper, we present attention-based 3D-convolutional neural networks (3D-CNNs) for SLR. The framework has two advantages: 3D-CNNs learn spatio-temporal features from raw video without prior knowledge and the attention mechanism helps to select the clue. When training 3D-CNN for capturing spatio-temporal features, spatial attention is incorporated into the network to focus on the areas of interest. After feature extraction, temporal attention is utilized to select the significant motions for classification. The proposed method is evaluated on two large scale sign language data sets. The first one, collected by ourselves, is a Chinese sign language data set that consists of 500 categories. The other is the ChaLearn14 benchmark. The experiment results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach compared with state-of-the-art algorithms.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@article{huang2019attention3DCNNsSLR,
 author = {Huang, Jie and Zhou, Wengang and Li, Houqiang and Li, Weiping},
 doi = {10.1109/TCSVT.2018.2870740},
 journal = {IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology},
 number = {9},
 pages = {2822-2832},
 title = {Attention-Based {3D-CNNs} for Large-Vocabulary Sign Language Recognition},
 volume = {29},
 year = {2019}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: ours
