---
semanticScholarId: "932168d1c27390506049adf679b42d3aac53f61c"
bibKey: "dataset:duarte2020how2sign"
year: 2020
title: "How2Sign: A Large-scale Multimodal Dataset for Continuous American Sign Language"
doi: "10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00276"
arxivId: "2008.08143"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "ar5iv"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: ar5iv
  bibtex: ours
---

# How2Sign: A Large-scale Multimodal Dataset for Continuous American Sign Language

**Year:** [[2020]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** A. Duarte; Shruti Palaskar; Deepti Ghadiyaram; Kenneth J. DeHaan; Florian Metze; Jordi Torres; Xavier Giró-i-Nieto

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/932168d1c27390506049adf679b42d3aac53f61c)
- [PDF](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2008.08143)
- [arXiv:2008.08143](https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.08143)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00276)

## Abstract

One of the factors that have hindered progress in the areas of sign language recognition, translation, and production is the absence of large annotated datasets. Towards this end, we introduce How2Sign, a multimodal and multiview continuous American Sign Language (ASL) dataset, consisting of a parallel corpus of more than 80 hours of sign language videos and a set of corresponding modalities including speech, English transcripts, and depth. A three-hour subset was further recorded in the Panoptic studio enabling detailed 3D pose estimation. To evaluate the potential of How2Sign for real-world impact, we conduct a study with ASL signers and show that synthesized videos using our dataset can indeed be understood. The study further gives insights on challenges that computer vision should address in order to make progress in this field.

## TL;DR

A study with ASL signers is conducted and it is shown that synthesized videos using the How2Sign dataset can indeed be understood and gives insights on challenges that computer vision should address in order to make progress in this field.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{dataset:duarte2020how2sign,
 author = {Amanda Cardoso Duarte and
Shruti Palaskar and
Lucas Ventura and
Deepti Ghadiyaram and
Kenneth DeHaan and
Florian Metze and
Jordi Torres and
Xavier Gir{\'{o}}{-}i{-}Nieto},
 bibsource = {dblp computer science bibliography, https://dblp.org},
 biburl = {https://dblp.org/rec/conf/cvpr/DuartePVGDMTG21.bib},
 booktitle = {{IEEE} Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, {CVPR}
2021, virtual, June 19-25, 2021},
 doi = {10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00276},
 pages = {2735--2744},
 publisher = {Computer Vision Foundation / {IEEE}},
 timestamp = {Mon, 18 Jul 2022 01:00:00 +0200},
 title = {How2Sign: {A} Large-Scale Multimodal Dataset for Continuous American
Sign Language},
 url = {https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2021/html/Duarte\_How2Sign\_A\_Large-Scale\_Multimodal\_Dataset\_for\_Continuous\_American\_Sign\_Language\_CVPR\_2021\_paper.html},
 year = {2021}
}
```

## Full Text

# How2Sign: A Large-scale Multimodal Dataset for Continuous American Sign Language

Amanda Duarte 1,2∗ Shruti Palaskar 4 Lucas Ventura 1 Deepti Ghadiyaram 5 Kenneth DeHaan 6 Florian Metze 4,5 Jordi Torres 1,2 Xavier Giro-i-Nieto 1,2,3∗ 1 *Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya* 2 *Barcelona Supercomputing Center* 3 *Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC* 4 *Carnegie Mellon University* 5 *Facebook AI* 6 *Gallaudet University*

###### Abstract

One of the factors that have hindered progress in the areas of sign language recognition, translation, and production is the absence of large annotated datasets.

Towards this end, we introduce How2Sign, a multimodal and multiview continuous American Sign Language (ASL) dataset, consisting of a parallel corpus of more than 80 hours of sign language videos and a set of corresponding modalities including speech, English transcripts, and depth. A three-hour subset was further recorded in the Panoptic studio

enabling detailed 3D pose estimation.

To evaluate the potential of How2Sign for real-world impact, we conduct a study with ASL signers and show that synthesized videos using our dataset can indeed be understood. The study further gives insights on challenges that computer vision should address in order to make progress in this field.

Dataset website: [http://how2sign.github.io/](http://how2sign.github.io/)

*Corresponding authors: {amanda.duarte,xavier.giro}@upc.edu

[Uncaptioned image]

<!-- image -->

## 1 Introduction

Sign languages (SL) are the primary means of communication for an estimated 466 million deaf 1 1 1 We follow the recognized convention of using the upper-cased word Deaf which refers to the culture and describes members of the community of sign language users and the lower-cased word deaf describes the hearing status [ [37](#bib.bib37) ] . or hard-of-hearing people worldwide [ [1](#bib.bib1) ] .

Like any other natural language, sign languages are consistently evolving and have structure directed by a set of linguistic rules [

[3](#bib.bib3) ] .

They differ from spoken languages and do not have standard written forms, \eg American Sign Language (ASL) is not a sign form of English.

Although sign languages are used by millions of people everyday to communicate, the vast majority of communications technologies nowadays are designed to support spoken or written language, but not sign languages. At the same time, most hearing people do not know a sign language; as a result, many communication barriers exist for deaf sign language users [

[6](#bib.bib6) , [7](#bib.bib7) , [14](#bib.bib14) ] .

Promising recent works in sign language processing 2 2 2 For brevity, we follow [ [6](#bib.bib6) ] and use the term *sign language processing* to refer to the set of sign language recognition, translation and production tasks. [ [12](#bib.bib12) , [30](#bib.bib30) , [33](#bib.bib33) , [41](#bib.bib41) , [40](#bib.bib40) , [19](#bib.bib19) ] have shown that modern computer vision and machine learning architectures can help break down these barriers for sign language users.

Improving such models could make technologies that are primarily designed for non-sign language users, \eg voice-activated services, text-based systems, spoken-media based content, \etc , more accessible to the Deaf community.

Other possibilities include automatic transcription of signed content, which would help facilitating the communication between sign and non-sign language users, as well as real-time interpreting when human interpreters are not available, and many other educational tools and applications [

[6](#bib.bib6) ] .

However, training such models requires large amounts of data.

The availability of public large-scale datasets suitable for machine learning is very limited, especially when it comes to

*continuous sign language* datasets, \ie , where the data needs to be segmented and annotated at the sentence level. Currently, there is no ASL dataset large enough to be used with recent deep learning approaches.

In order to instigate the advance in the area of research that involves sign language processing, in this paper we introduce the *How2Sign* dataset.

How2Sign is a large-scale collection of multimodal and multiview sign language videos in American Sign Language (ASL) for over 2500 instructional videos selected from the existing How2 dataset [

[27](#bib.bib27) ] . Figure [1](#S0.F1) shows samples of the data contained in the dataset. Working in close collaboration with native ASL signers and professional interpreters, we collected more than *80 hours* of multi-view and multimodal (recorded with multiple RGB and a depth sensor) ASL videos, and corresponding gloss annotations [ [22](#bib.bib22) ] . In addition, a three-hour subset was further recorded at the Panoptic studio [ [17](#bib.bib17) ] , a geodesic dome setup equipped with hundreds of cameras and sensors, which enables detailed 3D reconstruction and pose estimation. This subset paves the way for vision systems to understand the 3D geometry of sign language.

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

a) We present How2Sign, a large-scale multimodal and multiview continuous American Sign Language dataset that consists of more than

*80 hours of American Sign Language videos* , with sentence-level alignment for more than 35k sentences. It features a vocabulary of 16k English words that represent more than two thousand instructional videos from a broad range of categories;

b) Our dataset comes with a rich set of annotations including gloss, category labels, as well automatically extracted 2D keypoints for more than 6M frames. What is more, a subset of the dataset was re-recorded in the Panoptic studio with more than 500 cameras that enabled high quality 3D keypoints estimation for around 3 hours of videos;

c) We conduct a study with ASL signers that showed that videos generated using our dataset can be understood to a certain extent, and at the same time gave insights on challenges that the research community can address in this field.

## 2 Background and Related Work

In this section we discuss some of the challenges that comes with sign languages that can be interesting to the computer vision community, as well as an overview of the current publicly available sign language datasets.

### 2.1 Sign Language

Sign languages are visual languages that use two types of features to convey information: *manual* that includes handshape, palm orientation, movement and location and; *non-manual markers* that are movement of the head (nod/shake/tilt), mouth (mouthing), eyebrows, cheeks, facial grammar (or facial expressions) and eye gaze [ [32](#bib.bib32) ] .

All these features need to be taken into account while recognizing, translating or generating signs in order to capture the complete meaning of the sign. This makes sign language processing a challenging set of tasks for computer vision.

When it comes to continuous sign language, a simple concatenation of isolated signs is not enough to correctly recognize, translate or generate a complete sentence and neglects the underlying rich grammatical and linguistic structures of sign language that differ from spoken language. Besides the fact that the alignment between sign and spoken language sequences are usually unknown and non monotonic [ [12](#bib.bib12) ] , the transitions between signs must also be taken into account.

Usually, the beginning of a sign is modified depending on the previous sign, and the end of the same sign is modified depending on the following sign making them visually different in the isolated and continuous scenarios [

[3](#bib.bib3) ] . This phenomenon is called "co-articulation" and brings an extra challenge for tasks with continuous sign language [ [2](#bib.bib2) ] .

### 2.2 Sign Language datasets

One of the most important factors that has hindered the progress of sign language processing research is the absence of large scale annotated datasets [ [6](#bib.bib6) ] .

Many existing sign language datasets contain isolated signs [

[10](#bib.bib10) , [4](#bib.bib4) , [18](#bib.bib18) , [21](#bib.bib21) , [23](#bib.bib23) , [34](#bib.bib34) ] . Such data may be important for certain scenarios ( \eg , creating a dictionary, or as a resource for those who are learning a sign language), but most real-world use cases of sign language processing involve natural conversational with complete sentences ( \ie *continuous sign language* ).

A number of continuous sign language datasets have been collected over the years mainly for linguistic purposes.

SIGNUM [

[35](#bib.bib35) ] and the BSL Corpus [ [31](#bib.bib31) ] were recorded in controlled environments with a single RGB camera.

Recent works in neural machine translation [

[8](#bib.bib8) ] and production [ [30](#bib.bib30) , [28](#bib.bib28) ] have adopted RWTH-Phoenix-2014T [ [12](#bib.bib12) ] , a dataset of German Sign Language (DGS) on the specific domain of weather forecast from a TV broadcast that features 9 signers.

The Public DGS Corpus [

[15](#bib.bib15) ] and the Video-Based CSL (Chinese Sign Language) [ [16](#bib.bib16) ] provide much larger video collections enriched with the body keypoint of the signers. In the case of Public DGS Corpus , these are 2D poses estimated with OpenPose [ [9](#bib.bib9) ] and from different view points, while Video-Based CSL provides 3D joints and depth information thanks to the recordings with a Kinect camera.

If we focus on American Sign Language (ASL), RWTH-BOSTON-104 [

[39](#bib.bib39) ] only contains 8.7 minutes of grayscale video, while NCSLGR [ [24](#bib.bib24) ] is larger but an order of magnitud smaller than How2Sign.

In terms of annotation, all datasets but Video-Based CSL provide gloss annotations, that is, a text-based transcription of the signs that can serve as a proxy in translation tasks.

Table [1](#S1.T1) presents an overview of publicly available continuous sign language datasets ordered by vocabulary size 3 3 3 An extended overview of related datasets can be found at: [https://how2sign.github.io/related\_datasets.html](https://how2sign.github.io/related_datasets.html) .

An important factor for the lack of large-scale datasets is that the collection and annotation of continuous sign language data is a laborious and expensive task. It requires linguistic experts working together with a native speaker, e.g a Deaf person.

RWTH-Phoenix-2014T [

[12](#bib.bib12) ] is one of the few datasets that are publicly available and has been used for training deep neural networks. A recent re-alignment in the annotations also allows studying sign language translation.

However, their videos cover just 11 hours of data from weather broadcasts, and are restricted to one domain.

In summary, the current publicly available datasets are constrained by one or more of the following: (i) limited vocabulary size, (ii) short video or total duration and (iii) limited domain.

The How2Sign dataset provides a considerably larger vocabulary than the existing ones, and it does so in the continuous sign language setting for a broader domain of discourse. It also is the first sign language dataset that contains speech thanks to its alignment with the existing How2 dataset [

[27](#bib.bib27) ] .

## 3 The How2Sign dataset

The How2Sign dataset consists of a parallel corpus of speech and transcriptions of instructional videos and their corresponding American Sign Language (ASL) translation videos and annotations. A total of *80 hours* of multiview American Sign Language videos were collected, as well as gloss annotations [ [22](#bib.bib22) ] and a coarse video categorization.

Source language. The instructional videos translated into ASL come from the existing *How2 dataset* [ [27](#bib.bib27) ] , a publicly available multimodal dataset for vision, speech and natural language understanding, with utterance-level time alignments between the speech and the ground-truth English transcription. Following the same splits from the *How2-300h* dataset, we selected a 60-hour subset from the training set and the complete validation and test sets to be recorded.

### 3.1 Sign language video recordings

Refer to caption

<!-- image -->

Signers. In total, 11 people appear in the sign language videos of the How2Sign dataset; we refer to them as *signers* . Of the 11 signers, 5 self-identified as hearing, 4 as Deaf and 2 as hard-of-hearing. The signers that were hearing were either professional ASL interpreters (4) or ASL fluent.

Recording pipeline. The signer would first watch the video with the transcript as subtitles in order to become familiar with the overall content; this enables them to perform a richer translation. ASL translation videos were then recorded, while the signer was watching the video with subtitles, and at a slightly slower-than-normal (0.75) speed. For each hour of video recorded, the preparation, recording and video review took approximately 3 hours on average.

All recordings were performed in a supervised setting in two different locations: at the *Green Screen studio* and at the *Panoptic studio* , both presented below. We recorded the complete 80 hours of the dataset in the green screen studio. We then chose a small subset of videos (approx. 3 hours) from the validation and test splits and recorded them again in the Panoptic studio. After recording, we trimmed all sign language videos and divided them in *sentence-level clips* , each annotated with a corresponding English transcript, and the modalities presented in Section [3.2](#S3.SS2) .

Green screen studio. The *Green Screen studio* was equipped with a depth and a high definition (HD) camera placed in a frontal view of the participant, and another HD camera placed at a lateral view. All three cameras recorded videos at 1280x720 resolution, at 30 fps. Samples of data recorded in this studio are shown in the top row of Figure [1](#S0.F1) .

Panoptic studio. The *Panoptic studio* [ [17](#bib.bib17) ] is a system equipped with 480 VGA cameras, 30 HD cameras and 10 RGB-D sensors, all synchronized. All cameras are mounted over the surface of a geodesic dome 4 4 4 [http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~hanbyulj/panoptic-studio/](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~hanbyulj/panoptic-studio/) , providing redundancy for weak perceptual processes (such as pose detection) and robustness to occlusion. In addition to the multiview VGA and HD videos, the recording system can further estimate high quality 3D keypoints of the interpreters, also included in How2Sign.

Samples of data recorded in this studio are shown on the bottom-right of Figure

[1](#S0.F1) .

### 3.2 Dataset Modalities

The modalities enumerated in the columns of Table [1](#S1.T1) are detailed in this section.

Apart from the English translations and speech modalities that were already available from the How2 [

[27](#bib.bib27) ] dataset, all other modalities were either collected or automatically extracted. To the best of our knowledge, How2Sign is the largest publicly available sign language dataset across languages in terms of vocabulary, as well as an order of magnitude larger than any other ASL dataset in terms of video duration. We see that How2Sign is also the dataset with the most parallel modalities, enabling multimodal learning.

Multiview. All 80 hours of sign language videos were recorded from multiple angles. This allows the signs to be visible from multiple points of view, reducing occlusion and ambiguity, especially in the hands. Specifically, the sign language videos recorded in the Green Screen studio contain two different points of view, while the Panoptic studio recordings consist of recordings of more than 500 cameras allowing for a high quality estimation of 3D keypoints [ [17](#bib.bib17) ] .

Transcriptions. The English translation modality originates from the subtitles track of How2 original videos. The transcriptions were provided by the uploader of the instructional video in form of text, that was loosely synced with the video's speech track. As subtitles are not necessarily fully aligned with the speech, transcriptions were time-aligned at the sentence-level as part of the How2 dataset [ [27](#bib.bib27) ] .

Gloss is used in linguistics to transcribe signs using spoken language words. It is generally written in capital letters and indicates what individual parts of each sign mean, including annotations that account for facial and body grammar. An example of gloss annotation is shown on the bottom right of Figure [1](#S0.F1) .

It is important to note that gloss is not a true translation, it instead provides the appropriate spoken language morphemes that express the meaning of the signs in spoken language [

[20](#bib.bib20) , [22](#bib.bib22) ] . Glosses do not indicate special hand-shape, hand movement/orientation, nor information that would allow the reader to determine how the sign is made, or what its exact meaning in a given context. They also do not indicate grammatical uses of facial expressions (for example, raising the eyebrows is used in yes/no questions).

Gloss is the form of text that is closest to sign language and it has been used by a number of approaches as an intermediate representation for sign language processing [

[12](#bib.bib12) , [30](#bib.bib30) , [28](#bib.bib28) , [40](#bib.bib40) , [19](#bib.bib19) ] .

Pose information. Human pose information, \eg body, hand and face keypoints were extracted for all the recorded sign language videos in the full resolution - 1280 x 720 pixels.

For the Green Screen studio data, the 2-dimensional (2D) pose information was automatically extracted using OpenPose [

[9](#bib.bib9) ] . In total, each pose consists of 25 body keypoints, 70 facial keypoints and 21 keypoints for each hand. We provide pose information for both frontal and side view of the Green Screen studio data.

A sample of the pose information extracted can be seen on the bottom row in the left side of Figure

[1](#S0.F1) . For the Panoptic studio data, we provide high quality 3-dimensional (3D) pose information estimated by the Panoptic studio internal software [ [17](#bib.bib17) ] that can be used as ground-truth for a number of 3D vision tasks.

Depth data. For the Green Screen studio data, the sign language videos were also recorded using a Depth sensor (Creative BlasterX Senz3D) from the frontal viewpoint. The sensor has high precision facial and gesture recognition algorithms embedded and is able to focus on the hands and face, the most important human parts for sign language.

Speech. The speech track comes from the instructional videos as part of the How2 dataset [ [27](#bib.bib27) ] .

### 3.3 Collected Annotations

Beyond the video recordings and automatically extracted pose information, we further collected a number of manual annotations for the sign language videos.

Gloss and sentence boundaries. We collected gloss annotations by employing ASL linguists. The annotations were collected using ELAN [ [13](#bib.bib13) ] , an annotation software for audio and video recordings, specifically enhanced for sign language annotations.

Information in ELAN is represented in tiers which are time-aligned to the video files, giving us the start and end boundaries of each sentence and producing what we call the sentence boundaries.

The gloss annotation took in average one hour per 90 seconds of video.

Video Categories. Although the How2 dataset provides automatically extracted "topics" for all videos using Latent Dirichlet Allocation [ [5](#bib.bib5) ] , we found that the automatic annotations were in general very noisy and not properly characterizing the selected videos.

In order to better categorize the videos, we manually selected 10 categories

5 5 5 The categories are: Personal Care and Style, Games, Arts and Entertainment, Hobbies and Crafts, Cars and Other, Vehicles, Sports and Fitness, Education and Communication, Food and Drinks, Home and Garden and Pets and Animals. from the instructional website Wikihow 6 6 6 https://www.wikihow.com/Special:CategoryListing and manually classified each How2Sign video in a single category. The distribution of videos across the ten categories can be seen in Figure [3](#S3.F3) .

### 3.4 Dataset statistics

In Table [2](#S3.T2) we show detailed statistics of the How2Sign dataset.

A total of 2,456 videos from the How2 [

[27](#bib.bib27) ] were used to record the sign language videos. Some of the videos were recorded more than once by a different signer in the Green screen studio - 21 videos from the training set, 17 videos from the validation set and 35 videos from the test set. All the recorded Videos were split into sentence-level clips. Each clip has on average 162 frames (5.4 seconds) and 17 words. The distribution of frames (right) and words (left) over all the clips for the 3 splits of the dataset can be seen in Figure [2](#S3.F2) .

The collected corpus covers

*more than 35k sentences* with an English vocabulary of more than 16k words. Where approximately, 20% of it is finger spelled.

The videos were recorded by 11 different signers distributed across the splits.

The test set contains 26 duplicated videos that were recorded by a signer that is not present in the training set; this subset of 26 videos can be used for measuring generalization across different signers .

In total, 9 signers participated in the Green Screen studio recordings, and 6 signers in the Panoptic studio recordings.

The bottom section of Table

[2](#S3.T2) refers to the automatically extracted human pose annotations.

### 3.5 Privacy, Bias and Ethical Considerations

In this section we discuss some metadata that we consider important for understanding the biases and generalization of the systems trained on our data.

Privacy. Since facial expressions are a crucial component for generating and/or translating Sign Language, it was not possible to avoid recordings that include the signer's face. To that end, all the research steps followed procedures approved by the Carnegie Mellon University Institutional Review Board including a Social &amp; Behavioral Research training done by the first and second authors, and a consent form provided by the participants agreeing on being recorded and making their data publicly available for research purposes. It is important to note that this puts at risk the authenticity of the linguistic data collected, as signers may monitor their production more carefully than usual.

Audiological status and language variety. The majority of the participants identified American Sign Language and contact signing (Pidgin Sign English - PSE) as the main language used during the recordings. It is noteworthy that differences in audiological status are correlated with different language use. The Deaf were likely to identify ASL as the main language used in the recording process. In contrast, the hearing were likely to identify a mix of contact signing and ASL as the main language use in the recording process. More information about PSE and ASL can be found in [ [26](#bib.bib26) ] .

Geographic. All participants were born and raised in the United States of America, and learned American Sign Language as their primary or second language at school time.

Signer variety. Our dataset was recorded by signers with different body proportions. Six of them were self-identified male and five self-identified female. The dataset was collected across 65 days during 6 months which gives a variety of clothing and accessories used by the participants.

Data bias. Our data does not contain large diversity in race/ethnicity, skin tone, background scenery, lighting conditions and camera quality.

## 4 Evaluating the potential of How2Sign for sign language tasks

The communication barrier between sign and non-sign language users may be reduced in the coming years thanks to the recent advances in neural machine translation and computer vision.

Recent works are making steps towards sign language production [

[30](#bib.bib30) , [33](#bib.bib33) , [41](#bib.bib41) , [40](#bib.bib40) , [29](#bib.bib29) ] by automatically generating detailed human pose keypoints from spoken language, and translation [ [19](#bib.bib19) ] , \ie , using keypoints as input to generate text.

While keypoints can carry detailed human pose information and can be an alternative for reducing the computational bottleneck that is introduced when working with the actual video frames, no studies have been made so far on whether they are indeed useful when it comes to understanding sign language by its users.

In this section we present a study where we try to understand if and how well sign language users understand automatically generated sign language videos that use keypoints from How2Sign as sign language representation.

We run this study with four ASL speakers and record their understanding of the generated videos in terms of the category, translation into American English, and a final subjective rating about how understandable the videos were.

Figure 4 : Sample of generated SL videos. Source video (top row) was used to automatically extract 2D keypoints (middle row) and generate frames of a video with a different identity (bottom row).

<!-- image -->

### 4.1 Synthesizing sign language videos

We experiment with two ways of generating sign language videos: 1) skeleton visualizations and 2) Generative Adversarial Network generated (GAN-generated) videos. Skeleton visualizations. Given a set of estimated keypoints, one can visualize them as a wired skeleton connecting the modeled joints (see the middle row of Figure [4](#S4.F4) ). GAN-generated videos. Another option would be to go one step further and use generative models to synthesize videos on top of predicted keypoints. To generate the animated video of a signer given a set of keypoints, we use the motion transfer and synthesis approach called Everybody Dance Now (EDN) [ [11](#bib.bib11) ] . This model is based on Pix2PixHD [ [36](#bib.bib36) ] , but is further enhanced with a learned model of temporal coherence for better video and motion synthesis between adjacent frames by predicting two consecutive frames, as well as a separate module for high resolution face generation.

It is worth noting that this approach models facial landmarks separately, something highly desirable in our case because they are one of the critical features for sign language understanding.

The EDN model was trained on a subset of the How2Sign dataset that contains videos from two participants. Specifically, keypoints extracted from videos of the first signer (top row in Figure

[4](#S4.F4) ) were used to learn the model that generates realistic videos of the second signer (bottom row) 7 7 7 A sample of a generated video can be seen at: [https://youtu.be/wOxWUyXX6Ys](https://youtu.be/wOxWUyXX6Ys) .

The subset used consists of 28 hours of the training split.

#### 4.1.1 Quantitative evaluation of the GAN-generated sign language videos.

An approximate but automatic way of measuring the visual quality of the generated videos is by comparing the keypoints that can be reliably detected by OpenPose in the source and generated videos. We focus only on the 125 upper body keypoints which are visible in the How2Sign videos, and discard those from the legs. We use two metrics: a) the Percentage of Detected Keypoints (PDK), which corresponds to the fraction of keypoints from the source frame which were detected in the synthesized frame, and b) the Percentage of Correct Keypoints (PCK) [ [38](#bib.bib38) ] , which labels each detected keypoint as "correct" if the distance to the keypoint in the original image is less than 20% of the torso diameter in all keypoints and 10% of the torso diameter for the hands.

In Table [3](#S4.T3) we present these metrics for different minimum confidence thresholds of the OpenPose (OP keypoint detectors).

We report results for all keypoints, as well as when restricting the evaluation only on the hand keypoints.

We see that although the repeatability of keypoints is high in general, the model fails to predict reliable keypoints for the hands. This limitation is especially relevant in sign language processing.

### 4.2 Can ASL signers understand generated sign language videos?

We evaluate the degree of understanding for both skeleton visualizations and the GAN-generated videos by showing 3-minute-long videos to four ASL signers. Two of them watched the skeletons visualizations, while the other two watched the GAN-generated videos.

During the evaluation, each subject was asked to: a) classify six videos between the ten video categories (see subsection

[3.2](#S3.SS2) for more information about the dataset categories); b) answer the question "How well could you understand the video?" on the five-level scale ((1) Bad, (2) Poor, (3) Fair, (4) Good, (5) Excellent); and c) watch two clips from the previously seen video and translate them into American English.

Results averaged over all subjects are presented in Table

[4](#S4.T4) . We report accuracy for the classification task, the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for the five-scale question answers and BLEU [ [25](#bib.bib25) ] scores for the American English translations.

Qualitative results are shown in Table

[5](#S4.T5) .

Results show a preference towards the generated videos rather than the skeleton ones, as the former result in higher scores across all metrics.

In terms of general understanding of the topic, the subjects were able to mostly classify the videos correctly with both types of visualizations.

When it comes to finer grained understanding measured via the English translations, however, we can see from both Table [4](#S4.T4) and Table [5](#S4.T5) that neither skeletons nor GAN-generated videos are sufficient to convey important information needed from ASL signers to completely understand the sign language sentences.

We hypothesize that current human pose estimation methods such as [

[9](#bib.bib9) ] are still not mature enough when it comes to estimate fast movements of the hands. We observed that due to the nature of sign language and the fast movements of the signers' hands, OpenPose lacks precision in those cases which can make the visualizations incomplete, harming the understanding of some important parts of sign language.

How can computer vision do better? Our results show that the EDN model used as an out-of-the-box approach is not enough for sign language video generation. Specifically, we show that the model struggles with generating the hands and detailed facial expressions, which play a central role in sign language understanding.

We argue that human pose estimation plays an important key in this aspect and needs to be more robust to blurry images, especially in the hands and to fast movements in order to be suitable to sign language research.

We also argue that it is worth pursuing generative models that focus on generating hand details, particularly on the movements of the fingers, as well as clear facial expressions on full-body synthesis.

## 5 Conclusion

In this paper, we present the How2Sign dataset, *a large-scale multimodal and multiview dataset of American Sign Language* . With more than 80 hours of sign language videos and their corresponding speech signal, English transcripts and annotations,

How2Sign has the potential to impact a wide range of sign language understanding tasks, such as sign language recognition, translation and production, as well as wider multimodal and computer vision tasks like 3D human pose estimation.

How2Sign extends the How2 [

[27](#bib.bib27) ] dataset, an existing multimodal dataset with a new sign language modality, and therefore enables connecting with research performed in the vision, speech and language communities.

In addition to that, we further conducted a study in which sign language videos generated from the automatically extracted annotations of our dataset were presented to ASL signers. To our knowledge, this is the first study how well keypoint-based synthetic videos, a commonly used representation of sign language production and translation, can be understood by sign language users. Our study indicates that current video synthesis methods allow the understanding to a certain extent \ie , the classification of the video category, but lack in fidelity to allow for a fine-grained understanding of the complete sign language sentence.

## Acknowledgments

This work received funding from Facebook through gifts to CMU and UPC; through projects TEC2016-75976-R, TIN2015-65316-P, SEV-2015-0493 and PID2019-107255GB-C22 of the Spanish Government and 2017-SGR-1414 of Generalitat de Catalunya.

This work used XSEDE's "Bridges" system at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (NSF award ACI-1445606).

Amanda Duarte has received support from la Caixa Foundation (ID 100010434) under the fellowship code LCF/BQ/IN18/11660029.

Shruti Palaskar was supported by the Facebook Fellowship program. The authors would like to thank Chinmay Héjmadi, Xabier Garcia and Brandon Taylor for their help during the data collection and processing and Yannis Kalantidis for his valuable feedback.

This work would not be possible without the collaboration and feedback from the signers and the Deaf community involved throughout the project.

## References

- [1] World Health Organization 2019. Deafness and hearing loss. [https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/deafness-and-hearing-loss](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/deafness-and-hearing-loss) . Accessed: 2019-05-19.
- [2] Samuel Albanie, Gül Varol, Liliane Momeni, Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon Son Chung, Neil Fox, and Andrew Zisserman. Bsl-1k: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition using mouthing cues. In European Confernce on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020.
- [3] David F Armstrong, William C Stokoe, and Sherman E Wilcox. Gesture and the nature of language . Cambridge University Press, 1995.
- [4] Vassilis Athitsos, Carol Neidle, Stan Sclaroff, Joan Nash, Alexandra Stefan, Quan Yuan, and Ashwin Thangali. The american sign language lexicon video dataset. In CVPRW'08. , pages 1-8. IEEE, 2008.
- [5] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine Learning research , 3(Jan):993-1022, 2003.
- [6] Danielle Bragg, Oscar Koller, Mary Bellard, Larwan Berke, Patrick Boudreault, Annelies Braffort, Naomi Caselli, Matt Huenerfauth, Hernisa Kacorri, Tessa Verhoef, et al. Sign language recognition, generation, and translation: An interdisciplinary perspective. In The 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility , pages 16-31, 2019.
- [7] Ruth Butler, Tracey Skelton, and Gill Valentine. Language barriers: Exploring the worlds of the deaf. Disability Studies Quarterly , 21(4), 2001.
- [8] Necati Cihan Camgoz, Oscar Koller, Simon Hadfield, and Richard Bowden. Sign language transformers: Joint end-to-end sign language recognition and translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10023-10033, 2020.
- [9] Zhe Cao, Gines Hidalgo, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, and Yaser Sheikh. Openpose: realtime multi-person 2d pose estimation using part affinity fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08008 , 2018.
- [10] N Caselli, Z Sevcikova, A Cohen-Goldberg, and K Emmorey. Asl-lex: A lexical database for asl. Behavior Research Methods , 2016.
- [11] Caroline Chan, Shiry Ginosar, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei Efros. Everybody dance now. In ICCV , 2019.
- [12] Necati Cihan Camgoz, Simon Hadfield, Oscar Koller, Hermann Ney, and Richard Bowden. Neural sign language translation. In CVPR , pages 7784-7793, 2018.
- [13] Onno Crasborn and Sloetjes Han. Enhanced elan functionality for sign language corpora. Journal of deaf studies and deaf education , 2008.
- [14] Warren R Goldmann and James R Mallory. Overcoming communication barriers: communicating with deaf people. 1992.
- [15] Thomas Hanke, Marc Schulder, Reiner Konrad, and Elena Jahn. Extending the public dgs corpus in size and depth. In LREC2020 - Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages , pages 75-82, 2020.
- [16] Jie Huang, Wengang Zhou, Qilin Zhang, Houqiang Li, and Weiping Li. Video-based sign language recognition without temporal segmentation. In AAAI , 2018.
- [17] Hanbyul Joo, Hao Liu, Lei Tan, Lin Gui, Bart Nabbe, Iain Matthews, Takeo Kanade, Shohei Nobuhara, and Yaser Sheikh. Panoptic studio: A massively multiview system for social motion capture. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3334-3342, 2015.
- [18] Hamid Reza Vaezi Joze and Oscar Koller. Ms-asl: A large-scale data set and benchmark for understanding american sign language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01053 , 2018.
- [19] Sang-Ki Ko, Chang Jo Kim, Hyedong Jung, and Choongsang Cho. Neural sign language translation based on human keypoint estimation. Applied Sciences , 9(13), 2019.
- [20] Jolanta Lapiak. Gloss: transcription symbols. [https://www.handspeak.com/learn/index.php?id=3](https://www.handspeak.com/learn/index.php?id=3) . Accessed: 2019-08-20.
- [21] Dongxu Li, Cristian Rodriguez, Xin Yu, and Hongdong Li. Word-level deep sign language recognition from video: A new large-scale dataset and methods comparison. In The IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 1459-1469, 2020.
- [22] Scott K Liddell et al. Grammar, gesture, and meaning in American Sign Language . Cambridge University Press, 2003.
- [23] Aleix M Martínez, Ronnie B Wilbur, Robin Shay, and Avinash C Kak. Purdue rvl-slll asl database for automatic recognition of american sign language. In Proceedings. Fourth IEEE International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces , pages 167-172. IEEE, 2002.
- [24] Carol Neidle and Christian Vogler. A new web interface to facilitate access to corpora: Development of the asllrp data access interface (dai). In Proc. 5th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Interactions between Corpus and Lexicon, LREC , 2012.
- [25] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: A method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In ACL , 2002.
- [26] Judy Reilly and Marina L McIntire. American sign language and pidgin sign english: What's the difference? Sign Language Studies , pages 151-192, 1980.
- [27] Ramon Sanabria, Ozan Caglayan, Shruti Palaskar, Desmond Elliott, Loïc Barrault, Lucia Specia, and Florian Metze. How2: a large-scale dataset for multimodal language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00347 , 2018.
- [28] Ben Saunders, Necati Cihan Camgoz, and Richard Bowden. Adversarial training for multi-channel sign language production. In The 31st British Machine Vision Virtual Conference (BMVC) , 2020.
- [29] Ben Saunders, Necati Cihan Camgoz, and Richard Bowden. Everybody sign now: Translating spoken language to photo realistic sign language video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09846 , 2020.
- [30] Ben Saunders, Necati Cihan Camgoz, and Richard Bowden. Progressive transformers for end-to-end sign language production. In European Confernce on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2020.
- [31] Adam Schembri, Jordan Fenlon, Ramas Rentelis, Sally Reynolds, and Kearsy Cormier. Building the british sign language corpus. Language Documentation &amp; Conservation , 7:136-154, 2013.
- [32] William C Stokoe Jr. Sign language structure: An outline of the visual communication systems of the american deaf. Journal of deaf studies and deaf education , 10(1):3-37, 2005.
- [33] Stephanie Stoll, Necati Cihan Camgoz, Simon Hadfield, and Richard Bowden. Text2sign: towards sign language production using neural machine translation and generative adversarial networks. In International Journal of Computer Vision , 2020.
- [34] Špela Vintar, Boštjan Jerko, and Marjetka Kulovec. Compiling the slovene sign language corpus. In 5th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Interactions between Corpus and Lexicon. Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC) , volume 5, pages 159-162, 2012.
- [35] U. Von Agris and K.-F. Kraiss. Signum database: Video corpus for signer-independent continuous sign language recognition. In Workshop on Representation and Processing of Sign Languages , pages 243-246, 2010.
- [36] Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catanzaro. High-resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional gans. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2018.
- [37] James C Woodward. Implications for sociolinguistic research among the deaf. Sign Language Studies , pages 1-7, 1972.
- [38] Yi Yang and Deva Ramanan. Articulated human detection with flexible mixtures of parts. IEEE TPAMI , 35:2878-90, 12 2013.
- [39] Morteza Zahedi, Philippe Dreuw, David Rybach, Thomas Deselaers, and Hermann Ney. Continuous sign language recognition-approaches from speech recognition and available data resources. In Workshop on Representation and Processing of Sign Languages , 2006.
- [40] Jan Zelinka and Jakub Kanis. Neural sign language synthesis: Words are our glosses. In The IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 3395-3403, 2020.
- [41] Jan Zelinka, Jakub Kanis, and Petr Salajka. Nn-based czech sign language synthesis. In International Conf. on Speech and Computer , pages 559-568. Springer, 2019.

Supplementary Material

## 6 Sign Language

In this section we discuss in more detail some important non-manual features (that are not conveyed through other linguistic parameters \eg palm orientation, handshape, etc.) present in sign languages.

It is important to remember that American Sign Language, for example, requires more than just complex hand movements to convey a message. Without the use of proper facial expressions and other non-manual features as the ones described below, a message could be greatly misunderstood [

[32](#bib.bib32) ] .

Head movement. The movement of the head supports the semantics of sign language. Questions, affirmations, denials, and conditional clauses are communicated with the help of the signer's head movement.

Facial grammar. Facial grammar does not only reflect a person's affect and emotions, but also constitutes to large part of the grammar in sign languages. For example, a change of head pose combined with the lifting of the eye brows corresponds to a subjunctive.

Mouth morphemes (mouthing). Mouth movement or mouthing is used to convey an adjective, adverb, or another descriptive meaning in association with an ASL word.

Some ASL signs have a permanent mouth morpheme as part of their production. For example, the ASL word NOT-YET requires a mouth morpheme (TH) whereas LATE has no mouth morpheme. These two are the same sign but with a different non-manual signal.

These mouth morphemes are used in some contexts with some ASL signs, not all of them.

## 7 How2Sign dataset

Here we discuss some additional metadata that are important for a better understanding of our data as well as the biases and generalization of the systems trained using the How2Sign dataset. We also describe information that might be helpful for future similar data collection.

Gloss. We collected gloss annotations for the ASL videos present in the How2Sign dataset using ELAN. Figure [S2](#S7.F2) shows samples of the gloss annotations present in our dataset. Here we describe some conventional and few modified symbols and explanations that will be found in our dataset. A complete list is available on the dataset website.

- • Capital letters. English glosses are written using capital letters. They represent an ASL word or sign. It is important to remember that gloss is not a translation. It is only an approximate representation of the ASL sign itself, not necessarily a meaning.
- • A hyphen is used to represent a single sign when more than one English word is used in gloss ( \eg STARE-AT).
- • The plus sign (+) is used in ASL compound words ( \eg MOTHER+FATHER - used to transcribe parents). It is also used when someone combines two signs in one ( \eg YOU THERE will be glossed as YOU+THERE).
- • The plus sign (++) at the end of a gloss indicates a number of repetitions of an ASL sign ( \eg AGAIN++ - the word "again" was signed two more times meaning "again and again").
- • FS: represents a fingerspelled word ( \eg FS:AMELIA).
- • IX is a shortcut for "index", which means to point to a certain location, object, or person.
- • LOC is a shortcut for "locative", a part of the grammatical structure in ASL.
- • CL: is a shortcut for "classifier". Classifiers are signs that use handshapes that are associated with specific categories (classes) of things, size, shape, or usage. They can help to clarify the message, highlight specific details, and provide an efficient way of conveying information 8 8 8 More info about handshapes and classifiers can be found at: [https://www.lifeprint.com/asl101/pages-signs/classifiers/classifiers-main.htm](https://www.lifeprint.com/asl101/pages-signs/classifiers/classifiers-main.htm) . In our annotations, classifiers will appear as: "CL:classifier(information)". For example, if the signer signs "TODAY BIKE" and uses a classifier to show the bike going up the hill, this would be glossed as: "TODAY BIKE CL:3 (going uphill)").

Signers. Figure [S1](#S7.F1) show all the 11 signers that participated in the recordings of the How2Sign dataset. From the 11 signers, four of them (signers 1, 2, 3 and 10 ) participated in both the Green Screen studio and the Panoptic studio recordings. Signers 6 and 7 participated only in the Panoptic studio recordings, while signers 4, 5, 8, 9 and 11 participated only in the Green Screen recordings. The signer ID information of each video is also made available.

Figure S1: All the 11 signers that appear in the How2Sign dataset videos. On the top row, we can see signers 1-5 (from left to right) in the Green Screen Studio, while on the bottom row we can see signers 8-11 (again left to right) in the Green Screen Studio. The rightmost figure on the bottom row shows signers 6-7 in the Panoptic studio.

<!-- image -->

Figure S2: Samples of gloss annotations collected using ELAN.

<!-- image -->

Recording pipeline. Importance of providing the speech and original video to the signer before the recordings: As part of the design phase of our data collection, signers were asked to perform English to ASL translation when given: (1) just text without reading it beforehand; (2) the video and text together but without seeing it previously and (3) text and video together and allowing them to watch it before the recording. The conclusions for each case were: (1) signers found it hard to understand and follow the lines at the same time, causing lots of pauses and confusion; (2) signers found it easier to understand and translate but still with some pauses and (3) the understanding and flow improved.

### 7.1 Discussion

How high is the quality of the extracted keypoints? We conducted a number of studies to estimate the quality of the automatically extracted 2D poses. A number of sanity checks showed us that extracting keypoints in higher resolution (1280 x 720) resulted to pose estimation that have on average higher confidence - 53.4% average keypoint confidence for high resolution versus 42.4% confidence for low resolution (210 x 260).

This difference is more prominent when different parts of the body are analyzed. Table

[S1](#S7.T1) show the different average confidence scores when OpenPose is extracted using high and low resolution videos. We see that both hands are the most harm when low resolution is used.

More importantly, in Section 4 we present a study with native speakers and verified that our 2D keypoints are sufficient to a certain degree for sign language users to classify and transcribe the ASL videos back to English.

Factors that may impair accurate automatic tracking. During the recording, signers were requested to not use loose clothes, rings, earrings, watch, or any other accessories that might impair accurate automatic tracking. They were also asked to wear solid colored shirts (that contrast with their skin tone).

Out-of-vocabulary and signer generalization. Although not specifically designed for this, the How2Sign dataset can be used for measuring generalization with respect to both out-of-vocabulary words and signers. The dataset contains 413 and 510 out-of-vocabulary words, \eg words that occur in validation and test, respectively, but not in training. It further contains duplicate recordings on the test set by a signer that is not present in the training set ; these recordings can be used for measuring generalization across different signers and help understand how well the models can recognise or translate the signs given an out of the distribution subject.

Language variety. As discussed in subsection 3.5 our dataset contains variations in the language used during the recordings by each signer.

In addition to that, we also would like to mention that sign language speakers can also use different signs or different linguistic registers ( \ie , formal or casual) to express the same given sentence. As we can see in Figure

[S3](#S7.F3) , two signers from our dataset used two different signs in a linguistic register to express the phrase "I am". The signer on the left used the casual approach of signing (ME NAME) while the signer on the left used the formal approach (ME).

Figure S3: Sample of language variety on our dataset. Both signers were translating the sentence "I am". We can see that the signer on the left used the casual approach of signing it (ME NAME) while the signer on the left used the formal approach (ME).

<!-- image -->

Intra-sign variety. In addition to the variety of signs and linguistic registers, it is also common to notice differences in the way of performing the same sign. For example, we can see on Figure [S4](#S7.F4) two signers from our dataset signing the word "hair". In this sign, as described by its gloss annotation (IX-LOC-HAIR) the signer points to their own hair location. While performing the sign, the person can use slightly different locations to point at.

Figure S4: Sample of intra-sign variety. In this case, both signers are signing the word "hair" (IX-LOC-HAIR). We can see that the on the left choose to point to her hair on a different position from the signer on the right.

<!-- image -->

### 7.2 How2Sign statistics per signer

Table [S2](#S7.T2) presents detailed statistics of the videos from the How2Sign dataset recorded in the Green Screen studio grouped by signer.

## References

- [[64934681480d28a1fb313c5de4922e92a2bd0ac3]] — Everybody Sign Now: Translating Spoken Language to Photo Realistic Sign Language Video (2020)
- [[e61ff9694321710cac36b3822bcc08a28df6240c]] — Adversarial Training for Multi-Channel Sign Language Production (2020)
- [[fe6c2b21f6086c375f4e211efb6c4d6479d54f01]] — BSL-1K: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition using mouthing cues (2020)
- [[58cdf6a994558124d5c4f836473837e778530be2]] — Extending the Public DGS Corpus in Size and Depth (2020)
- [[5a65e6184d18cd93ccbaa4d940a27749358ef824]] — Progressive Transformers for End-to-End Sign Language Production (2020)
- [[05dcdfece56d1869895f53ed581d8ad64118c05f]] — Sign Language Transformers: Joint End-to-End Sign Language Recognition and Translation (2020)
- [[1305675bd403c74935873fd2dc0d22483d421556]] — Neural Sign Language Synthesis: Words Are Our Glosses (2020)
- [[7f6231aae6e5eb5b62f85429f3ad8eaa96fee11e]] — Text2Sign: Towards Sign Language Production Using Neural Machine Translation and Generative Adversarial Networks (2020)
- [[874063b6c71aef8382eb66a66d8a1c1188e78a9a]] — Word-level Deep Sign Language Recognition from Video: A New Large-scale Dataset and Methods Comparison (2019)
- [[c7fd5973a2cb3f7c6a5df0120400bc47b2f2bacf]] — Sign Language Recognition, Generation, and Translation: An Interdisciplinary Perspective (2019)
- [[33951382e3e1fd72e53a3fae744ccb5825a26e87]] — NN-Based Czech Sign Language Synthesis (2019)
- [[9e8db1519245426f3a78752a3d8360484f4626b1]] — OpenPose: Realtime Multi-Person 2D Pose Estimation Using Part Affinity Fields (2018)
- [[74669631d3f1fcc06d0e5e5daa7e4bfd5b6f6b59]] — Neural Sign Language Translation based on Human Keypoint Estimation (2018)
- [[f56cb5dc32b5b280546998418fda7769d0858629]] — How2: A Large-scale Dataset for Multimodal Language Understanding (2018)
- [[e3a10973ee4e3be5fc53bee96e4d8e56469e432a]] — Everybody Dance Now (2018)
- [[644602c65a5d8f30e62be027eb7b47f7c335191a]] — Neural Sign Language Translation (2018)
- [[a274fcf985aaec1f009cfe4b4042733321a5a8b4]] — Video-based Sign Language Recognition without Temporal Segmentation (2018)
- [[576ccf5806f9395a738afe394129108ef958c655]] — Deafness and hearing loss (2017)
- [[f0a0c0f0d6a7ff53abea40a8c0c678ed570bf851]] — High-Resolution Image Synthesis and Semantic Manipulation with Conditional GANs (2017)
- [[586eb9f2eb5d963ef95c266eab2723bd8d7911a3]] — Panoptic Studio: A Massively Multiview System for Social Motion Capture (2015)
- [[562737212e6e63c75689a28f72d132ee3183cff3]] — Continuous sign language recognition: Towards large vocabulary statistical recognition systems handling multiple signers (2015)
- [[9f04d907ba87261d4e46ed03dd7de0ec7a1a125f]] — Articulated Human Detection with Flexible Mixtures of Parts (2013)
- [[0161d830a7695921d7d7800842323815b6987a13]] — American Sign Language and Pidgin Sign English: What’s the Difference ? (2013)
- [[272ffdfdb0848dbd28585c93a0cceb981afd0c53]] — Implications for Sociolinguistic Research among the Deaf (2013)
- [[890614f30de4d2e651b66858e871ea5fe2f1d98a]] — Building the British Sign Language Corpus (2013)
- [[9aa8c15cd8c24407b0e54b3b65e632bce0c27d5b]] — A new web interface to facilitate access to corpora: development of the ASLLRP data access interface (2012)
- [[46b658f9e291b1ff1684aa9f778c31ed1c92a23a]] — Learning signs from subtitles: A weakly supervised approach to sign language recognition (2009)
- [[199ad824920180981af1ddaed37643e18da04e69]] — Efficient approximations to model-based joint tracking and recognition of continuous sign language (2008)
- [[cb1c84c69d4b8a7b633349800e8f5a93f3551452]] — The American Sign Language Lexicon Video Dataset (2008)
- [[28a0ee5b3e82e13f6f399ab776cbab041f1f511e]] — Purdue RVL-SLLL ASL database for automatic recognition of American Sign Language (2002)
- [[d7da009f457917aa381619facfa5ffae9329a6e9]] — Bleu: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation (2002)
- [[4865e882f3342c8a82c668800a0d16c49dcf6adf]] — Language Barriers: Exploring the Worlds of the Deaf (2001)
- [[13a813cc37a2f814068387973a36e253ebc99fd5]] — Sign language structure: an outline of the visual communication systems of the American deaf. 1960. (1961)
- Ms-asl: A largescale data set and benchmark for understanding american sign language (2018)
- Asl-lex: A lexical database for asl. Behavior Research Methods (2016)
- [[d68ad19453f411710e9bfc9ef2a6cd5dac6bc1f1]] — Dicta-Sign – Building a Multilingual Sign Language Corpus (2012)
- Compiling the slovene sign language corpus. In 5th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Interactions between Corpus and Lexicon (2012)
- Signum database: Video corpus for signer-independent continuous sign language recognition (2010)
- [[4574d77fff19e093782178595a8988a7f3aa1969]] — Latent Dirichlet Allocation (2009)
- [[e1623ec6b2bc3532129a3682eb263cc2e7d5389c]] — Enhanced ELAN functionality for sign language corpora (2008)
- [[a6719272a76059a92fe7eec9b339c11f4e4d9cec]] — Continuous Sign Language Recognition – Approaches from Speech Recognition and Available Data Resources (2006)
- Grammar, gesture, and meaning in American Sign Language (2003)
- [[fa93f10d9fc7b360e1b020d5e4a452a3fe981aee]] — Gesture and the Nature of Language (1995)
- [[2ea82eeb4119d4fc9dd1e34ea253d7e9b6e6b966]] — Overcoming Communication Barriers: Communicating with Deaf People (1992)
- [[9b47693db08b250e72abd52ab442d740c75f9fef]] — Publishing DGS corpus data: Different Formats for Different Needs ()
- Gloss: transcription symbols ()

## Cited by

- [[2b32a45281d91d6117287898191e170aa50d4800]] — An overview of sign language processing from natural language processing perspective (2026)
- [[a7be79d96ce80783472eace86f0ba04b82f79496]] — Personalized continuous sign language production via a motion-aware federated diffusion model (2026)
- [[9976887c6af2cfc8dee9edce2f8bf86e63968613]] — CNSL-bench: Benchmarking the Sign Language Understanding Capabilities of MLLMs on Chinese National Sign Language (2026)
- [[6b5a8dec430e95980f97e477c6a191be5329a3fc]] — SignDATA: Data Pipeline for Sign Language Translation (2026)
- [[f84406a0fe360bc082683acf70be2436eb7202df]] — Think in Latent Thoughts: A New Paradigm for Gloss-Free Sign Language Translation (2026)
- [[a8b36831a84b1a404f18584aeb2cb24b847f74c1]] — Beyond Technical Metrics: Understanding the Gap Between AI Performance and Deaf User Experience in Chinese Natural Sign Language Generation (2026)
- [[c1b2b6b4a3041fcb4b12003303b89f6ca0010e64]] — Exploring AI Opportunities in Deaf Education: Understanding Design Needs Through Teacher and Parent Perspectives in Bangladesh (2026)
- [[acc9f7e537f131cc10a0f1f38b4220ec25986672]] — Toward Scalable ASL Education: Egocentric Stereo Sensing with LLM Feedback for Error-Aware Learning (2026)
- [[5d04d00d15c87abb9f0f02ba924618859f766781]] — AuslanSpell: An Interactive Technology for Improving Auslan Fingerspelling Comprehension (2026)
- [[1e1a52338dd59f79d8e99904001e872e1ce81110]] — Sign-to-Speech Prosody Transfer via Sign Reconstruction-based GAN (2026)
- [[e70d5b1b15454591e9c0fbddbd8853b78a4146ac]] — Bootstrapping Sign Language Annotations with Sign Language Models (2026)
- [[dd12064ef9e36003cb12cf4242e348bdf6dde86c]] — FlashSign: Pose-Free Guidance for Efficient Sign Language Video Generation (2026)
- [[16da253965c595945938a0ba63e50a2b012801d9]] — M3T: Discrete Multi-Modal Motion Tokens for Sign Language Production (2026)
- [[aac5bc270b3d32beafea1ca71c05208b8a4b9169]] — SignSparK: Efficient Multilingual Sign Language Production via Sparse Keyframe Learning (2026)
- [[7b9d787fcbb3db7a613c2c60ee68db0bd3d87f23]] — Multinational sign language recognition framework for inclusive multimedia communication (2026)
- [[1dcf6af73768523c47a37da90c185d77132ecc4c]] — Sign4all: a Spanish Sign Language dataset (2026)
- [[eca4875c9e6e46148e85985023bb84367e3ec9f6]] — Sign language translation via cross-modal alignment and graph convolution (2026)
- [[1dc9cc2ee2db8c746fa3bf08684a52a9f024cf36]] — Mobile Auslan: A multimodal dialogue-centered sign language learning system (2026)
- [[5ed89e3c2b9942e4990662cc4c15faf11c9d538d]] — Beyond a Single Reference: Training and Evaluation with Paraphrases in Sign Language Translation (2026)
- [[e31e7e62721c975c984f1cf42c8c01edde10048e]] — MaDiS: Taming Masked Diffusion Language Models for Sign Language Generation (2026)
- [[5d341d5a03f1499bda6de6e1896236825bbbb69d]] — Advances in Automatic Sign Language Translation: A Survey of Techniques and Systems (2026)
- [[aa9c98db70bc090b0466f318c77b4a02cfbf6ec6]] — AI tool/app for Indian Sign Language (ISL) generator from audio-visual content in English/Hindi to ISL content and vice versa (2025)
- [[a7737f318b02fc16a1d6c3a734ac3f74fa6f62ad]] — DexAvatar: 3D Sign Language Reconstruction with Hand and Body Pose Priors (2025)
- [[87541b0de186de7e9b38adf318ec49761fcf28f9]] — Bridging Communication Barriers: A Review on SLR by means of Machine Learning and AI (2025)
- [[e5391cbce51571b92edc777b225bbadadff915e4]] — "Nothing about us without us": Perspectives of Global Deaf and Hard-of-hearing Community Members on Sign Language Technologies (2025)
- [[8b440fd23f5533afd77de1bab2c8f8d1f2337339]] — Lost in Translation, Found in Embeddings: Sign Language Translation and Alignment (2025)
- [[97f68acfae2157810ca22af735b24b8f6c59cab1]] — Segment, Embed, and Align: A Universal Recipe for Aligning Subtitles to Signing (2025)
- [[74514e67b5bfecf220f291159dc02e6fd5fccf71]] — RVLF: A Reinforcing Vision-Language Framework for Gloss-Free Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[6889779829e84da13b0c6263fccdc7a272c98558]] — Gloss-Free Sign Language Translation With Optical-Flow Guided Two-Stream Network (2025)
- [[606eee1f40122e0043e016bda7d1dfbd5b455902]] — A two-stage sign language generation framework with self-supervised latent representation learning (2025)
- [[b59d24be6789b1308e63f70b723461fd781e41ba]] — Bangla Sign Language Translation: Dataset Creation Challenges, Benchmarking and Prospects (2025)
- [[9799309580044531a0bba962e04514f015438b16]] — WMSM: An Efficient Real-Time Framework for Hebrew Sign Language Recognition and Sentence-Level Translation (2025)
- [[71e4e392a69969d6e432e831454383b45eb0ce63]] — SignMask: Structure-aware Masked Modeling for Holistic 3D Sign Language Production (2025)
- [[6dadfd65c1d1380b4feaddd7241c4a893c73243d]] — RoCoISLR: A Romanian Corpus for Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[01db05368a29085063a5fe28f58663fbd7a687c1]] — Emotive Audio Synthesis for Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[4a696b409e26dfb337a43c7104bec6165c06d46f]] — Large Sign Language Models: Toward 3D American Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[aac5037c041417ae9761208e8e931482c91da012]] — Enhanced sign language translation using three stream multimodal occlusion resilient transformer (2025)
- [[71fc7987c1ea1a0e1ef086f2b30dc969661698fd]] — English sign language corpus with real-time mobile recognition and NLP for phrase interpretation (2025)
- [[eb7ea015570e832aeb2ef00b90a687bce4c07495]] — POSESTITCH-SLT: Linguistically Inspired Pose-Stitching for End-to-End Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[6329ba7a3de2c301cd9a368cbf574667028c1fbe]] — Seeing, Signing, and Saying: A Vision-Language Model-Assisted Pipeline for Sign Language Data Acquisition and Curation from Social Media (2025)
- [[14b593f1839b322027385acffdbd2adf064296b1]] — Isolated German Sign Language Recognition for Classifying Polar Answers Using Landmarks and Lightweight Transformers (2025)
- [[296a53b1ae09eb87cd9e06e6fa393c5a3cac7348]] — An Exact Optimization Approach for Text Filtering in the Context of Parallel SL Corpus Sub-sampling (2025)
- [[46e34068e4e5f34d04a06e299d0d57146a8583fa]] — Enabling American Sign Language Communication Under Low Data Rates (2025)
- [[6c48c6a183d4eb15a99f4f5cd638ad6b89d4f687]] — Sentence-level Segmentation for Long Sign Language Videos with Captions (2025)
- [[465645990bf8e0a75d6a646811aade6f0c6060d0]] — How Pragmatics Shape Articulation: A Computational Case Study in STEM ASL Discourse (2025)
- [[1599915c75025be69cf63794fb6da92c61c2261c]] — SignStreamNet: Streaming Sign Language Video-to-Text Translation for Accessibility (2025)
- [[1bbe11fc9e5a3cc1994131cd0814140b8ed2c084]] — Sign-MExD: An Expert-Infused Diffusion Model for Sign Language Production (2025)
- [[89a8762ee05ce83d206fd41b1fb3f3398f1fb76b]] — Sign Language Translation with Sentence Embedding Supervision (2025)
- [[2bd38fa2a88ef2f68d2f42067a60cfa986c22352]] — Grounding or Guessing? Visual Signals for Detecting Hallucinations in Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[986e1af5d34652aff69856dd579c9884d55673f7]] — Introduction to the First Workshop on Vision Foundation Models and Generative AI for Accessibility (2025)
- [[b69d58f596515f65368151c82360274759585b8a]] — Can a Lightweight Transformer Deliver a Robust Multimodal Sign Language Word Recognition? (2025)
- [[82db1824b958b9120d887615cc3b8b548d6666cc]] — Saudi Sign Language Translation Using T5 (2025)
- [[727509c39fb87b6a9616506caacefb0e101a1039]] — Lightweight Transformers for Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[48892703af8836b5f756241bd235e07e8d803b70]] — Meaningful Pose-Based Sign Language Evaluation (2025)
- [[c0d6dcf8ba5aa95685a6120ef6d08d00a6e12c19]] — SignRobot: Sign Language Recognition for Robot Interaction Based on Dual-Stream Multi-Fusion with Frame Enhancement Network (2025)
- [[203388afd7591ed8e6970f7db3dcd7837bbe7ae8]] — Madrasati-Signs: A Hybrid Crowdsourcing Approach to Creating a Moroccan Sign Language School Dictionary for General and STEM Terms (2025)
- [[bf9a5d3488c3a4c76d290e679cf091684871e7be]] — Gloss-free Sign Language Translation: An unbiased evaluation of progress in the field (2025)
- [[133240761fdec8330223d1d7ff28dceba0cd6324]] — SignGlass: First-Person View Comprehensive and Generalizable ASL Translation Using Wearable Glass (2025)
- [[cb44e02a66c108551e4c71579bfb85376bede6e9]] — Modality Matters: Training and Tokenization Effects in Sign-to-Text Translation (2025)
- [[49430f19d7f93fcd3428803c10cda1a0e8e349e8]] — Exploring Sign-level Strategies to Enhance Automatic Translation of French Sign Language (2025)
- [[75ac194fd2f886b427d7f7fb41287228b25eda66]] — Sign Language Translation using Skip Connections and Selective Self-transfer Learning (2025)
- [[beb9f2513dceed49bae3067c5c58b25283d1c02d]] — Exploring Sign Language Dataset Augmentation with Generative Artificial Intelligence Videos: A Case Study Using Adobe Firefly-Generated American Sign Language Data (2025)
- [[f13c7f91dda0cddb92444cb83576c8210db875b6]] — Text2Sign Diffusion: A Generative Approach for Gloss-Free Sign Language Production (2025)
- [[ec9b10a74302623cd21598808a8cdcb65376f5f3]] — SignMouth: Leveraging Mouthing Cues for Sign Language Translation by Multimodal Contrastive Fusion (2025)
- [[2c47ea298354df5b6a95fbb44f40efe3b6439747]] — MultimodalHugs: Enabling Sign Language Processing in Hugging Face (2025)
- [[44eedcc557bc34d380f1e44e53c89c1317d81f91]] — Temporal Dynamics and Self-Attention: Adapting Vision Transformers for Sequential Sign Language Data (2025)
- [[653d8a86202e609ece7ab63818b0da81831590c1]] — Continuous Saudi Sign Language Recognition: A Vision Transformer Approach (2025)
- [[27dd57c5084513c21ca36f2ffa1d68ccae74ac84]] — Towards Inclusive Communication: A Unified Framework for Generating Spoken Language from Sign, Lip, and Audio (2025)
- [[f03410461c0ca48035e7f646f8fde9f64b4c34bf]] — Crowdsourcing-Based Interactive Learning Platform for the International Sign Language Community (2025)
- [[870d9a166172e82e57099b5031f2454bad7cad83]] — Text-Driven 3D Hand Motion Generation from Sign Language Data (2025)
- [[e6a60f10736d7054b16db5053d80810ca3aabd11]] — SignBind-LLM: Multi-Stage Modality Fusion for Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[cd3fdfe53884777dadadb9b08c589ebd93a155b4]] — Improving IMU based human activity recognition using simulated multimodal representations and a MoE classifier (2025)
- [[81292097d38b5d6622d606f4965806313e296d0d]] — The TUB Sign Language Corpus Collection (2025)
- [[242fc6f553a3de4fcdb82d317291f91799b3af01]] — Integrating Key-point Information for Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[4c1e3319b5572bebfbf1482f63d196e6ed5e999e]] — Teach Me Sign: Stepwise Prompting LLM for Sign Language Production (2025)
- [[13ce8c737a71c9a365bcd48ed17d3803ae2a18e0]] — SAGE: Segment-Aware Gloss-Free Encoding for Token-Efficient Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[60e8edda257da4084e04394eac9f380d8e62b6da]] — Hybrid Autoregressive-Diffusion Model for Real-Time Sign Language Production (2025)
- [[af87124042020e78aecf22495510168a160f103d]] — Speak2Sign3D: A Multi-modal Pipeline for English Speech to American Sign Language Animation (2025)
- [[be87e74bb187bae0003359e22030bf78c21f7c81]] — Sign Spotting Disambiguation using Large Language Models (2025)
- [[f0272493d7f23192b938722a7d285cf01e37830d]] — Multi-View Hallucinatory Feature Generation Network for Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[1081120008485d6e9dcacd68b0c1e6ec70fde7fd]] — MATE: LLM-Powered Multi-Agent Translation Environment for Accessibility Applications (2025)
- [[912db905e9af8b279b2f17888d757014711b8092]] — Multi-Scale Context-Aware Modeling for Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[42081fa0362909c848343117c4d71e3ad7f41e81]] — Advanced Sign Language Video Generation with Compressed and Quantized Multi-Condition Tokenization (2025)
- [[2064f4b63dd3df577177b303c6efa59901a9316c]] — Diffusion-Based Continuous Sign Language Generation with Cluster-Specific Fine-Tuning and Motion-Adapted Transformer (2025)
- [[c7b25fc375e5edaa1fe1c94bf1cee7c5f495daf9]] — Dual-view Spatio-Temporal Feature Fusion with CNN-Transformer Hybrid Network for Chinese Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[66e1bf848f0f431a2a7fa1ddab600fc958503532]] — Isharah: A Large-Scale Multi-Scene Dataset for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[ec427dcdbe256cdf90c009b81c0f39c9563cd801]] — SignBot: Learning Human-to-Humanoid Sign Language Interaction (2025)
- [[2a79bb407bd22b99fe0f609e4d34d5296854c824]] — Geo-Sign: Hyperbolic Contrastive Regularisation for Geometrically Aware Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[416e62a0551affacd2d0617997d2586ee8062152]] — iLSU-T: an Open Dataset for Uruguayan Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[79a7f1761e78fe9e2178acc0ee8c75121b0ee6ef]] — Interactive Sign Language Question Answering Framework and Dataset for Barrier-Free Exhibition Service (2025)
- [[6e7bc8d9f9c1183ab6d95874ff78d79ba163d6a5]] — Bridging Sign and Spoken Languages: Pseudo Gloss Generation for Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[38a3c9986077cfb5d5cb90ffc5933fb6481bca60]] — EmoSign: A Multimodal Dataset for Understanding Emotions in American Sign Language (2025)
- [[322c8d8d0f1ae99dbdc0b81120c6fdb0cca04c58]] — Robust Photo-Realistic Hand Gesture Generation: from Single View to Multiple View (2025)
- [[8365f39b916e2bdeef0452fb7298cd77fb0f4a65]] — GUAVA: Generalizable Upper Body 3D Gaussian Avatar (2025)
- [[b4986f6aa63bd6d164669bacf4e362dffa999c51]] — Multi-view Isolated sign language recognition based on cross-view and multi-level transformer (2025)
- [[76f8047018fb0b2102263c5ddfdcbc7482d34dee]] — Voice of the Unheard: Conversational Challenges Between Signers and Non-Signers and Design Interventions for Adaptive SLT Systems (2025)
- [[ee9ebac1bea69c5d28c9639d38972b11d33d3ae7]] — Women's Safety Through Real-Time Gesture Recognition Using Mediapipe and Machine Learning Algorithms (2025)
- [[71725607eafedb512af4ebf96312de21716517bd]] — AuslanWeb: A Scalable Web-Based Australian Sign Language Communication System for Deaf and Hearing Individuals (2025)
- [[eeec4ec285dc3ff2ac382d47587d569711672409]] — SignX: Continuous Sign Recognition in Compact Pose-Rich Latent Space (2025)
- [[b46a2bc3b1b915bb317bf9afb05b6e8c6f2f4c56]] — A large dataset covering the Chinese national sign language for dual-view isolated sign language recognition (2025)
- [[264a75c8b7491b00c9441e014e367f6d765b5b37]] — ADAT: Time-Series-Aware Adaptive Transformer Architecture for Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[f1182753ab4571e6eb7d4a6ec2c798298b1ed974]] — Graph Network for Sign Language Tasks (2025)
- [[25b83afc698b46fe015499b84b34c2ccc8e5ecf8]] — 3DSignDiff: Towards 3D Sign Language Gesture Generation (2025)
- [[32ae6b5453d9ec4e5c5861b94ac01110406036d2]] — Sign-Mamba: Advanced Mamba-Based Sign Language Generation (2025)
- [[d05419e48f56bb38e46283c781d467b529c8930c]] — DUNE: Distilling a Universal Encoder from Heterogeneous 2D and 3D Teachers (2025)
- [[997d39b5c2cc3ac485e0c19a561bf0001ee1f0e8]] — SignRep: Enhancing Self-Supervised Sign Representations (2025)
- [[2c6a02c1e7213b3801f4f3119721933d161c3fbd]] — ASLTranscribe: An Integrated Approach for ASL Detection and Sentence Formation Using Transformer and GPT-2 Model (2025)
- [[1b9d95c86aff94f2aace7f652c8701130cc79ff1]] — Generating synthetic sign language datasets using conditional generative adversarial networks (2025)
- [[bbf87d50e62ef8a40132dcc9a4ec1c4a80b03d15]] — SignFormer-GCN: Continuous sign language translation using spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks (2025)
- [[a735cfc188c58eb4fa6824600d22c3c75de6c77e]] — Towards AI-driven Sign Language Generation with Non-manual Markers (2025)
- [[5171a33d1b066318e47540ea0290a8fe24946f93]] — Uni-Sign: Toward Unified Sign Language Understanding at Scale (2025)
- [[6b76ea4478d8c831c466b0db3a6ee1197c9d8391]] — AfriSign: African sign languages machine translation (2025)
- [[579ddc45b1d3cc849323da23f358b832788e71a5]] — Lost in Translation, Found in Context: Sign Language Translation with Contextual Cues (2025)
- [[ef9534958d11655a942e89534de81053998c01b1]] — Beyond Words: AuralLLM and SignMST-C for Sign Language Production and Bidirectional Accessibility (2025)
- [[d24fc2be73bf6ceb20cd27b414cc1bc7433b1d44]] — Arabic Algerian Sign Language Translation System Based on 3D Avatar Technology (2024)
- [[08859a0bad6df7e8af4edfd16091aefc110cf881]] — VR Applications and Vision-Based Recognition Techniques for Sign Language: A Survey (2024)
- [[8291f76c4280dc66df0d309b5707a9a40d0a00fd]] — RTSLIS: A Real-Time Sign Language Interpretation System Based on Vision Transformers (2024)
- [[c2d99f4cf86109ab687aef2308464dcbd3cc345e]] — Generative Interpolation of Sign Language Poses using RVQ-VAE (2024)
- [[f4f98d8acda7c1d5aa91eab3c70250572b4acdf0]] — Two-Way Malaysian Sign Language Communication System for Inclusive Education (2024)
- [[54c68eac946a102a3cb8c923701bf18c8f70f5eb]] — A review of deep learning-based approaches to sign language processing (2024)
- [[78834d896ab1230dbcbf7123789a5388dba8a25e]] — A survey on sign language recognition from perspectives of traditional and deep-learning methods (2024)
- [[1ffb51c115fd904f8ca2a080c8247711fe0780a8]] — Signs as Tokens: A Retrieval-Enhanced Multilingual Sign Language Generator (2024)
- [[176716570620686e310bf34fa8dd0340eea821d2]] — SHuBERT: Self-Supervised Sign Language Representation Learning via Multi-Stream Cluster Prediction (2024)
- [[9a7210e6a5cc05c0b0f194476e997ae454b2ff59]] — Speech2Sign with ASL-Transformers and SL-GAN (2024)
- [[08aee6390d06e6f273dcd474749eaa88c1ccb901]] — AzSLD: Azerbaijani sign language dataset for fingerspelling, word, and sentence translation with baseline software (2024)
- [[e6f120420e2c0207adadfb54eafbe9ec53dc6d8e]] — ASL STEM Wiki: Dataset and Benchmark for Interpreting STEM Articles (2024)
- [[f02baaa33f013dc72768191925957b66fe6783f5]] — Overcoming Modality Bias in Question-Driven Sign Language Video Translation (2024)
- [[97e726f4d84a959bf1cebaa1b1b9497af098b8c4]] — Real-time mobile application for Arabic sign alphabet recognition using pre-trained CNN (2024)
- [[f5ce1659fb518c22e9e2cc7f18e6663995a43e21]] — Diverse Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[64c2cc33074fdf9ccb59211d6d89b04a09833207]] — Beyond FVD: Enhanced Evaluation Metrics for Video Generation Quality (2024)
- [[ec203e84302f07cb98a866acd39d2fb9615149e9]] — Sign Language Recognition and Translation Methods Promote Sign Language Education: A Review (2024)
- [[1c425e62106dd4b5f45c9de13565fd67ce484186]] — AirLetters: An Open Video Dataset of Characters Drawn in the Air (2024)
- [[fecd1aca44a468d7ca2993abe4d9ee1de002e9b6]] — A Chinese Continuous Sign Language Dataset Based on Complex Environments (2024)
- [[b09bdbe6610fb4c5e6ddfb1b6fcf2301a0fe1648]] — Adaptive Multi-Modal Control of Digital Human Hand Synthesis Using a Region-Aware Cycle Loss (2024)
- [[d13509b6b97445fe7797c176f4985e7495188778]] — The NGT200 Dataset: Geometric Multi-View Isolated Sign Recognition (2024)
- [[e5fe41a7752789b92af758e2af12cc8516e2f437]] — SCOPE: Sign Language Contextual Processing with Embedding from LLMs (2024)
- [[ba4639075817a458133fdac4908e8e25f179acfe]] — Reviewing 25 years of continuous sign language recognition research: Advances, challenges, and prospects (2024)
- [[eb9231d780c4af1ed2932736d016d858ec893b5a]] — Improving End-to-End Sign Language Translation With Adaptive Video Representation Enhanced Transformer (2024)
- [[29d3e566922d12a3003808bc175772e67a6de56a]] — Empowering sign language communication: Integrating sentiment and semantics for facial expression synthesis (2024)
- [[236636d77a95b1dda141cb4c4df73e96e44c2e13]] — FLEURS-ASL: Including American Sign Language in Massively Multilingual Multitask Evaluation (2024)
- [[7e4467f33b96fee46f216ee54b002c37309773a3]] — An Efficient Sign Language Translation Using Spatial Configuration and Motion Dynamics with LLMs (2024)
- [[4de028b7c31e24d6e5dff73b3d51ee4e585de939]] — C2RL: Content and Context Representation Learning for Gloss-Free Sign Language Translation and Retrieval (2024)
- [[8247c7a67e4e3e526cee10ca9499b1936204e79c]] — Scaling up Multimodal Pre-Training for Sign Language Understanding (2024)
- [[f1572a1d9e4bd74a1e281b782dcfa219635392d9]] — A Methodological and Structural Review of Hand Gesture Recognition Across Diverse Data Modalities (2024)
- [[b524e153ed536c3b00250b4898d2c1911d2d2a43]] — Human-Robot Sign Language Motion Retargeting from Videos (2024)
- [[d92418e52ebc74fffe3c1ae8e0f23768dd197a40]] — A Novel Approach for Sign Language Video Generation Using Deep Networks (2024)
- [[bf2aa772699b429e7c9b6b14e7905db62e0f8419]] — Deep Learning Methods of Dynamic Sign Language Translation: A Rapid Umbrella Review (2024)
- [[a70cd8ac6b2d220ec3d64ecbab3828f04a14d229]] — Impact of face swapping and data augmentation on sign language recognition (2024)
- [[fbf3f4bf3681b220737329050f5e8bcb172bb605]] — SEDS: Semantically Enhanced Dual-Stream Encoder for Sign Language Retrieval (2024)
- [[43b6df00902179f40f0124b96c6a62ef10e67d60]] — FSboard: Over 3 million characters of ASL fingerspelling collected via smartphones (2024)
- [[5fadb52eeebcf45283a87972ffb28b56b22a8cb6]] — EvSign: Sign Language Recognition and Translation with Streaming Events (2024)
- [[f6c41e5a92edfafe7382a6c324e6072555a79efd]] — Scaling Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[932156355ff5bba8fb8d75faef6ca36a1b91f575]] — YouTube-SL-25: A Large-Scale, Open-Domain Multilingual Sign Language Parallel Corpus (2024)
- [[7dc0adeacfa9083b792cb3659caf752e740ce2ed]] — AirSketch: Generative Motion to Sketch (2024)
- [[933c6d3bc6b0fb8f4e15a1dd63d953f2985811b3]] — iSign: A Benchmark for Indian Sign Language Processing (2024)
- [[f6dd611dda2690fe079ed036508a28a2fcac762c]] — Markerless Multi-view 3D Human Pose Estimation: a survey (2024)
- [[1950ef81f3f01f1bc043615232e4688b6cc08cf8]] — MS2SL: Multimodal Spoken Data-Driven Continuous Sign Language Production (2024)
- [[26a8511fb5cec82ea46ebc456b995f3d4d6cbe48]] — A Spatio-Temporal Representation Learning as an Alternative to Traditional Glosses in Sign Language Translation and Production (2024)
- [[75a7a3ab20a620f612db3337fcf6df03b304242d]] — SignCLIP: Connecting Text and Sign Language by Contrastive Learning (2024)
- [[bc7f94b13343c6207b70fa9674c862dda627f046]] — Real-Time Ragging Notification Using Machine Learning Algorithms and MediaPipe (2024)
- [[f71c97f3df29443228c92a44fcaedbc9eab0a228]] — Towards Human Action Recognition in Open Environments: A Proof of Concept on Spanish Sign Language Vowels (2024)
- [[4c850c928197df19ba57270d7c577e8f96ddd809]] — Reconsidering Sentence-Level Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[a718d9484f1364f03ad4864451ec84f16e1a3c05]] — SignMusketeers: An Efficient Multi-Stream Approach for Sign Language Translation at Scale (2024)
- [[186910d697bf7eb605aa055aee78fd91ce3ce9fe]] — T2S-GPT: Dynamic Vector Quantization for Autoregressive Sign Language Production from Text (2024)
- [[7c75d64b60824b81c9f86bb8b9cd7cce9087dc8b]] — Enhancing Inertial Hand based HAR through Joint Representation of Language, Pose and Synthetic IMUs (2024)
- [[b887ddb469d02f4ef4487235981730a809997131]] — Multi-View Bangla Sign Language Recognition: A New Word-Level Video Dataset (2024)
- [[2c41ef36c6ba268a0e3c39594cc7d103387f2fed]] — SynthSL: Expressive Humans for Sign Language Image Synthesis (2024)
- [[ffd1b10368627a9e12e06c262f870df5662abe74]] — A Gloss-Free Sign Language Production with Discrete Representation (2024)
- [[9908bc6756b476b4c54dcbb3c64ec213891d6f73]] — SignLLM: Sign Language Production Large Language Models (2024)
- [[13195df56368306dc1c1f9733cebb8dd694c94af]] — A Tale of Two Languages: Large-Vocabulary Continuous Sign Language Recognition from Spoken Language Supervision (2024)
- [[073cc1eed9cf323a3d249942b9ccb8636817a21b]] — Korean Disaster Safety Information Sign Language Translation Benchmark Dataset (2024)
- [[649b86d31d8ae10cc973da90e1e672d09c174764]] — DGS-Fabeln-1: A Multi-Angle Parallel Corpus of Fairy Tales between German Sign Language and German Text (2024)
- [[f0dac0fb9829dbb9087716093662f69df35f188e]] — SwissSLi: The Multi-parallel Sign Language Corpus for Switzerland (2024)
- [[563e54dffc0c75c784d8dc3988f62a8c7a11e667]] — 3D-LEX v1.0 – 3D Lexicons for American Sign Language and Sign Language of the Netherlands (2024)
- [[869cf45c0c77db3f513e11770f33375c43c6d86a]] — Matignon-LSF: a Large Corpus of Interpreted French Sign Language (2024)
- [[579a40c93495ff23c0dfb316b38e663918e6a4a5]] — Shedding Light on the Underexplored: Tackling the Minor Sign Language Research Topics (2024)
- [[cd41a0933ddd4ce7b6ce82ccd2e95eb1e887d1db]] — Generation and Detection of Sign Language Deepfakes: A Linguistic and Visual Analysis (2024)
- [[832dd2923e8821bf8c664101a62ffa3ef46e6b47]] — LLMs are Good Sign Language Translators (2024)
- [[b34d7110f1a21943064934d4bfc24990f379ee5b]] — Sign Language Recognition (SLR): A Brisk Paired Deep Metric Attention Learning (BPDMAL) Model for Video Data Applications (2024)
- [[58289f6f9ff452bf2764e31dbd790d90481b3987]] — MI-NeRF: Learning a Single Face NeRF from Multiple Identities (2024)
- [[1153e5379790c30b9c2c9bb111aec55965a1500f]] — Factorized Learning Assisted with Large Language Model for Gloss-free Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[8d9d2c33565a222b80025521121a5e971ef15968]] — AI empowered Auslan learning for parents of deaf children and children of deaf adults (2024)
- [[ff98c2fd4907b117b62c4688c0f6843e39f0b6a1]] — Spotter+GPT: Turning Sign Spottings into Sentences with LLMs (2024)
- [[f6965c1674b57aa14ea364d8f14744f7c0fc09b0]] — A Novel Approach for Photo-Realistic High Quality Sign Language Video Synthesis (2024)
- [[ae0209d81cf24c9dedf901685b481b4cdd0b6cba]] — Sign Language Gestures Recognition using CNN and Inception v3 (2024)
- [[7fc461bac1c6dbd2b6b453ef909201924cf5e2cf]] — Synthetic Corpus Generation for Deep Learning-Based Translation of Spanish Sign Language (2024)
- [[e8dd2e6a9f155fb17b153594f71deb91a29f5b07]] — Towards Privacy-Aware Sign Language Translation at Scale (2024)
- [[e8f1f184edff7f12bc96f239b8c4a2f0043b552a]] — American Sign Language Video to Text Translation (2024)
- [[3e121c7b4bc5b7e8c37517a42091859cdde4c466]] — Keyframe Extraction Algorithm for Continuous Sign-Language Videos Using Angular Displacement and Sequence Check Metrics (2024)
- [[c3d0606b55f0c47138fd0c40a7dfaffd0ece0f3a]] — A Simple Baseline for Spoken Language to Sign Language Translation with 3D Avatars (2024)
- [[fe0642711d7c34046a62d9e9589de2bcffeb345a]] — Sign Language Production with Latent Motion Transformer (2023)
- [[bba8cd6989f743dc84680ee7efabbfc58203bdf0]] — SignSpeak: Exploring the Sign Language Communication Using Deep Neural Networks (2023)
- [[331dffe8474b960d5d009ee3f42099f78b27bc80]] — Neural Sign Actors: A diffusion model for 3D sign language production from text (2023)
- [[621bb0f9356acbce0a3f83375347055073979bab]] — TLFS23 Tamil language fingerspelling dataset (2023)
- [[1f1662b0fc27e14d91cce87e60a4b63a1d6e484b]] — Comprehensive study of Sign Language Conversion Using Machine Learning (2023)
- [[d85a09074e2e99400a97f307290baa35e5f415ee]] — Sign Language Dataset for Automatic Motion Generation (2023)
- [[6ae80b2ae981994c981cb641612334f1a92665d1]] — Fingerspelling PoseNet: Enhancing Fingerspelling Translation with Pose-Based Transformer Models (2023)
- [[aac82bf9ae4f8b8ff8af15d1102c04aa1486295f]] — JWSign: A Highly Multilingual Corpus of Bible Translations for more Diversity in Sign Language Processing (2023)
- [[33aa057a8268a5965e1682904f4148fbd16cf1ee]] — SignAvatars: A Large-scale 3D Sign Language Holistic Motion Dataset and Benchmark (2023)
- [[9914882d98b0fcc7796a8ea6591b31ce240b8354]] — Selecting Suitable Data Input for Deep-Learning Sign-Language Recognition with a Small Dataset (2023)

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: ar5iv
- bibtex: ours
