---
semanticScholarId: "a4ba5d2327a83b25f27ab82ca7cbf4a78797ab5e"
bibKey: "dataset:joshi-etal-2023-isltranslate"
year: 2023
title: "ISLTranslate: Dataset for Translating Indian Sign Language"
doi: "10.48550/arXiv.2307.05440"
arxivId: "2307.05440"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "ar5iv"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: ar5iv
  bibtex: ours
---

# ISLTranslate: Dataset for Translating Indian Sign Language

**Year:** [[2023]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Abhinav Joshi; Susmit Agrawal; Ashutosh Modi

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a4ba5d2327a83b25f27ab82ca7cbf4a78797ab5e)
- [PDF](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.05440)
- [arXiv:2307.05440](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.05440)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.05440)

## Abstract

Sign languages are the primary means of communication for many hard-of-hearing people worldwide. Recently, to bridge the communication gap between the hard-of-hearing community and the rest of the population, several sign language translation datasets have been proposed to enable the development of statistical sign language translation systems. However, there is a dearth of sign language resources for the Indian sign language. This resource paper introduces ISLTranslate, a translation dataset for continuous Indian Sign Language (ISL) consisting of 31k ISL-English sentence/phrase pairs. To the best of our knowledge, it is the largest translation dataset for continuous Indian Sign Language. We provide a detailed analysis of the dataset. To validate the performance of existing end-to-end Sign language to spoken language translation systems, we benchmark the created dataset with a transformer-based model for ISL translation.

## TL;DR

This resource paper introduces ISLTranslate, a translation dataset for continuous Indian Sign Language (ISL) consisting of 31k ISL-English sentence/phrase pairs, and provides a detailed analysis of the dataset to validate the performance of existing end-to-end Sign language to spoken language translation systems.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{dataset:joshi-etal-2023-isltranslate,
 address = {Toronto, Canada},
 author = {Joshi, Abhinav  and
Agrawal, Susmit  and
Modi, Ashutosh},
 booktitle = {Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023},
 doi = {10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.665},
 editor = {Rogers, Anna  and
Boyd-Graber, Jordan  and
Okazaki, Naoaki},
 pages = {10466--10475},
 publisher = {Association for Computational Linguistics},
 title = {{ISLT}ranslate: Dataset for Translating {I}ndian {S}ign {L}anguage},
 url = {https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.665},
 year = {2023}
}
```

## Full Text

# ISLTranslate: Dataset for Translating Indian Sign Language

Abhinav Joshi 1 Susmit Agrawal 2 Ashutosh Modi 1 1 Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur (IIT Kanpur) 2 Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad (IIT Hyderabad) {ajoshi, ashutoshm}@cse.iitk.ac.in , ai22mtech12002@iith.ac.in

###### Abstract

Sign languages are the primary means of communication for many hard-of-hearing people worldwide. Recently, to bridge the communication gap between the hard-of-hearing community and the rest of the population, several sign language translation datasets have been proposed to enable the development of statistical sign language translation systems. However, there is a dearth of sign language resources for the Indian sign language. This resource paper introduces ISLTranslate , a translation dataset for continuous Indian Sign Language (ISL) consisting of 31k ISL-English sentence/phrase pairs. To the best of our knowledge, it is the largest translation dataset for continuous Indian Sign Language. We provide a detailed analysis of the dataset. To validate the performance of existing end-to-end Sign language to spoken language translation systems, we benchmark the created dataset with a transformer-based model for ISL translation.

## 1 Introduction

There are about 430 million hard-of-hearing people worldwide 1 1 1 [https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/deafness-and-hearing-loss](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/deafness-and-hearing-loss) of which 63 million are in India 2 2 2 [https://nhm.gov.in/index1.php?lang=1&amp;level=2&amp;sublinkid=1051&amp;lid=606](https://nhm.gov.in/index1.php?lang=1&level=2&sublinkid=1051&lid=606) . Sign Language is a primary mode of communication for the hard-of-hearing community. Although natural language processing techniques have shown tremendous improvements in the last five years, primarily, due to the availability of annotated resources and large language models Tunstall et al. ( [2022](#bib.bib26) ) , languages with bodily modalities like sign languages still lack efficient language-processing systems. Recently, research in sign languages has started attracting attention in the NLP community Yin et al. ( [2021](#bib.bib29) ); Koller et al. ( [2015](#bib.bib15) ); Sincan and Keles ( [2020](#bib.bib25) ); Xu et al. ( [2022](#bib.bib28) ); Albanie et al. ( [2020](#bib.bib1) ); Jiang et al. ( [2021](#bib.bib11) ); Moryossef et al. ( [2020](#bib.bib19) ); Joshi et al. ( [2022](#bib.bib12) ) . The availability of translation datasets has improved the study and development of NLP systems for sign languages like ASL (American Sign Language) Li et al. ( [2020](#bib.bib16) ) , BSL (British Sign Language) Albanie et al. ( [2021](#bib.bib2) ) , and DGS (Deutsche Gebärdensprache) Camgoz et al. ( [2018](#bib.bib3) ) . On the other hand, there is less amount of work focused on Indian Sign Language. The primary reason is the unavailability of large annotated datasets for Indian Sign Language (ISL).

ISL being a communication medium for a large, diverse population in India, still faces the deficiency of certified translators (only 300 certified sign language interpreters in India

3 3 3 The statistic is as per the Indian government organization Indian Sign Language Research and Training Centre (ISLRTC): [http://islrtc.nic.in/](http://islrtc.nic.in/) ), making the gap between spoken and sign language more prominent in India. This paper aims to bridge this gap by curating a new translation dataset for Indian Sign Language: ISLTranslate , having 31 , 222 31 222 31,222 ISL-English pairs.

Figure 1: An example showing the translation of the phrase "Let's discuss" in Indian Sign Language.

<!-- image -->

Due to fewer certified sign language translators for ISL, there is a dearth of educational material for the hard-of-hearing community. Many government and non-government organizations in India have recently started bridging this gap by creating standardized educational content in ISL. The created content helps build basic vocabulary for hard-of-hearing children and helps people use spoken languages to learn and teach ISL to children. Considering the standardized representations and simplicity in the vocabulary, we choose these contents for curating an ISL-English translation dataset. We choose the content specific to education material that is standardized and used across India for primary-level education. Consequently, the vocabulary used in the created content covers diverse topics (e.g., Maths, Science, English) using common daily words.

ISL is a low-resource language, and the presence of bodily modality for communication makes it more resource hungry from the point of view of training machine learning models. Annotating sign languages at the gesture level (grouping similar gestures in different sign sentences) is challenging and not scalable. Moreover, in the past, researchers have tried translating signs into gloss representation and gloss to written language translation (Sign2Gloss2Text Camgoz et al. ( [2018](#bib.bib3) ) ). A gloss is a text label given to a signed gesture. The presence of gloss labels for sign sentences in a dataset helps translation systems to work at a granular level of sign translation. However, generating gloss representation for a signed sentence is an additional challenge for data annotation. For ISLTranslate , we propose the task of end-to-end ISL to English translation. Figure [1](#S1.F1) shows an example of an ISL sign video from ISLTranslate . The example shows a translation for the sentence "Let's discuss", where the signer does the sign for the word "discuss" by circularly moving the hands with a frown face simultaneously followed by palm lifted upwards for conveying "let's." The continuity present in the sign video makes it more challenging when compared to the text-to-text translation task, as building a tokenized representation for the movement is a challenging problem. Overall, in this resource paper, we make the following contributions:

- • We create a large ISL-English translation dataset with more than 31 , 222 31 222 31,222 ISL-English pair sentences/phrases. The dataset covers a wide range of daily communication words with a vocabulary size of 11 , 655 11 655 11,655 . We believe making this dataset available for the NLP community will facilitate future research in sign languages with a significant societal impact. Moreover, though not attempted in this paper, we hope that ISLTranslate could also be useful for sign language generation research. The dataset is made available at: [https://github.com/Exploration-Lab/ISLTranslate](https://github.com/Exploration-Lab/ISLTranslate) .
- • We propose a baseline model for end-to-end ISL-English translation inspired by sign language transformer Camgoz et al. ( [2020](#bib.bib4) ) .

## 2 Related Work

In contrast to spoken natural languages, sign languages use bodily modalities, which include hand shapes and locations, head movements (like nodding/shaking), eye gazes, finger-spelling, and facial expressions. As features from hand, eye, head, and facial expressions go in parallel, it becomes richer when compared to spoken languages, where a continuous spoken sentence can be seen as a concatenated version of the sound articulated units. Moreover, translating from a continuous movement in 3 dimensions makes sign language translation more challenging and exciting from a linguistic and research perspective.

Sign Language Translation Datasets: Various datasets for sign language translation have been proposed in recent years Yin et al. ( [2021](#bib.bib29) ) . Specifically for American Sign Language (ASL), there have been some early works on creating datasets Martinez et al. ( [2002](#bib.bib18) ); Dreuw et al. ( [2007](#bib.bib8) ) , where the datasets were collected in the studio by asking native signers to sign content. Other datasets have been proposed for Chinese sign language Zhou et al. ( [2021](#bib.bib31) ) , Korean sign language Ko et al. ( [2018](#bib.bib14) ) , Swiss German Sign Language - Deutschschweizer Gebardensprache (DSGS) and Flemish Sign Language - Vlaamse Gebarentaal (VGT) Camgöz et al. ( [2021](#bib.bib5) ) . In this work, we specifically target Indian Sign Language and propose a dataset with ISL videos-English translation pairs.

Figure 2: A sample from ISLTranslate : "Sign Language is a visual language consisting of signs, gestures, fingerspelling and facial expressions."

<!-- image -->

End-to-End Sign Language Translation Systems: Most of the existing approaches for sign language translation Camgoz et al. ( [2018](#bib.bib3) ); De Coster and Dambre ( [2022](#bib.bib6) ); De Coster et al. ( [2021](#bib.bib7) ) depend on intermediate gloss labels for translations.

As glosses are aligned to video segments, they provide fine one-to-one mapping that facilitates supervised learning in learning effective video representations. Previous work Camgoz et al. (

[2018](#bib.bib3) ) has reported a drop of about 10.0 10.0 10.0 in BLEU-4 scores without gloss labels. However, considering the annotation cost of gloss-level annotations, it becomes imperative to consider gloss-free sing language translation approaches. Moreover, the gloss mapping in continuous sign language might remove the grammatical aspects from the sign language.

Other recent works on Sign language translation include Voskou et al. (

[2021](#bib.bib27) ); Yin and Read ( [2020](#bib.bib30) ) , which try to remove the requirement for a glossing sequence for training and proposes a transformer-based architecture for end-to-end translations. We also follow a gloss-free approach for ISL translation.

## 3 ISLTranslate

ISLTranslate is a dataset created from publicly available educational videos produced by the ISLRTC organization and made available over YouTube. These videos were created to provide school-level education to hard-of-hearing children. The videos cover the NCERT 4 4 4 [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National\_Council\_of\_Educational\_Research\_and\_Training](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Council_of_Educational_Research_and_Training) standardized English educational content in ISL. As the targeted viewers for these videos are school children and parents, the range of words covered in the videos is beginner-level. Hence, it provides a good platform for building communication skills in ISL. The videos cover various NCERT educational books for subjects like science, social science, and literature. A single video (about 15-30 minutes) usually covers one chapter of a book and simultaneously provides an audio voice-over (in English) conveying the same content. Apart from ISLRTC's educational sign videos which make up a significant portion of ISLTranslate , we also use another resource from Deaf Enabled Foundations (DEF) ( [https://def.org.in/](https://def.org.in/) ). DEF videos consist of words with respective descriptions and example sentences for the same words, along with the text transcriptions available in the descriptions 5 5 5 Example video: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=429wv1kvK\_c](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=429wv1kvK_c) . We split the DEF Sign videos into multiple segments using visual heuristics for separating segments corresponding to words, descriptions, and examples. In total, ISLTranslate consists of 2685 2685 2685 videos ( 8.6 % percent 8.6 8.6\% ) from DEF, and the remaining 28537 28537 28537 videos ( 91.4 % percent 91.4 91.4\% ) are from ISLRTC.

ISLTranslate Creation: We use the audio voice-over (by analyzing the speech and silence parts) to split the videos into multiple segments. Further, these segments are passed through the SOTA speech-to-text model Radford et al. ( [2022](#bib.bib21) ) to generate the corresponding text. As the generated text is the same as present in the book chapters' text, verifying the generated sample was easy and was done by manually matching them with the textbook. In general, we found automatically transcribed text to be of high quality; nevertheless, incorrectly generated text was manually corrected with the help of content in the books.

Figure [2](#S2.F2) shows an example (from ISLTranslate ) of a long sentence and its translation in ISL. The frames in the figure are grouped into English words and depict the continuous communication in ISL. Notice the similar words in the sentence, "sign/signs" and "language." (also see a visual representation of Sign Language 6 6 6 [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SInKhy-06qA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SInKhy-06qA) ). As common to other natural languages, representations (characters/gestures) of different lengths are required for communicating different words. In ISLTranslate , we restrict to the sentence/phrase level translations. The dataset is divided into train, validation, and test splits (Details in App. [A](#A1) ). App. Figure [3](#A2.F3) shows the distribution of the number of samples in various splits.

Comparison with Other Continuous Sign-Language Datasets: We primarily compare with video-based datasets containing paired continuous signing videos and the corresponding translation in written languages in Table [1](#S2.T1) . To the best of our knowledge, we propose the largest dataset for ISL.

Data Cleaning and Preprocessing: The videos (e.g., App. Fig. [4](#A3.F4) ) contain the pictures corresponding book pages. We crop the signer out of the video by considering the face location as the reference point and removing the remaining background in the videos.

Noise Removal in ISLTranslate : As the ISLTranslate consists of videos clipped from a longer video using pauses in the available audio signal, there are multiple ways in which the noises in the dataset might creep in. While translating the text in the audio, a Signer may use different signs that may not be the word-to-word translation of the respective English sentence. Moreover, though the audio in the background is aligned with the corresponding signs in the video, it could happen in a few cases that the audio was fast compared to the corresponding sign representation and may miss a few words at the beginning or the end of the sentence. We also found a few cases where while narrating a story, the person in the audio takes the character role by modifying speech to sound like the designated character speaking the sentence. For example, in a story where a mouse is talking, instead of saying the sentence followed by the "said the mouse" statement, the speakers may change their voice and increase the pitch to simulate dialogue spoken by the mouse. In contrast, in the sign language video, a person may or may not take the role of the mouse while translating the sentence to ISL.

ISLTranslate Validation: To verify the reliability of the sentence/phrase ISL-English pairs present in the dataset, we take the help of a certified ISL signer. Due to the limited availability of certified ISL Signers, we could only use a small randomly selected sign-text pairs sample ( 291 291 291 pairs) for human translation and validation. We ask an ISL instructor to translate the videos (details in App. [C](#A3) ). Each video is provided with one reference translation by the signers. Table [2](#S3.T2) shows a sample of sentences created by the ISL instructor. To quantitatively estimate the reliability of the translations in the dataset, we compare the English translation text present in the dataset with the ones provided by the ISL instructor. Table [3](#S3.T3) shows the translation scores for 291 291 291 sentences in ISLTranslate . Overall, the BLEU-4 score is 48.94 48.94 48.94 , ROUGE-L Lin ( [2004](#bib.bib17) ) is 60.44 60.44 60.44 , and WER (Word Error Rate) is 61.88 61.88 61.88 . To provide a reference for comparison, for text-to-text translations BLEU score of human translations ranges from 30-50 (as reported by Papineni et al. ( [2002](#bib.bib20) ) , on a test corpus of about 500 sentences from 40 general news stories, a human translator scored 34.68 against four references). We speculate high reliability over the translations present in the ISLTranslate with a BLEU score of 48.93 compared against the reference translations provided by certified ISL Signer. Ideally, it would be better to have multiple reference translations available for the same signed sentence in a video; however, the high annotation effort along with the lower availability of certified ISL signers makes it a challenging task.

## 4 Baseline Results

Given a sign video for a sentence, the task of sign language translation is to translate it into a spoken language sentence (English in our case). For benchmarking ISLTranslate , we create a baseline architecture for ISL-to-English translation. We propose an ISL-pose to English translation baseline (referred to as Pose-SLT) inspired by Sign Language Transformer (SLT) Camgoz et al. ( [2020](#bib.bib4) ) . Sign language transformer uses image features with transformers for generating text translations from a signed video. However, considering the faster real-time inference of pose estimation models Selvaraj et al. ( [2022](#bib.bib23) ) , we use pose instead of images as input. We use the Mediapipe pose estimation pipeline 7 7 7 [https://ai.googleblog.com/2020/12/mediapipe-holistic-simultaneous-face.html](https://ai.googleblog.com/2020/12/mediapipe-holistic-simultaneous-face.html) . A similar SLT-based pose-to-Text approach was used by Saunders et al. ( [2020](#bib.bib22) ) , which proposes Progressive Transformers for End-to-End Sign Language Production and uses SLT-based pose-to-text for validating the generated key points via back translation (generated pose key points to text translations). Though the pose-based approaches are faster to process, they often perform less than the image-based methods. For the choice of holistic key points, we follow Selvaraj et al. ( [2022](#bib.bib23) ) , which returns the 3D coordinates of 75 key points (excluding the face mesh). Further, we normalize every frame's key points by placing the midpoint of shoulder key points to the center and scaling the key points using the distance between the nose key point and the shoulders midpoint. We use standard BLEU and ROUGE scores to evaluate the obtained English translations (model hyperparameter details in App. [D](#A4) ). Table [4](#S4.T4) shows the results obtained for the proposed architecture. Poor BLEU-4 result highlights the challenging nature of the ISL translation task. The results motivate incorporating ISL linguistic priors into data-driven models to develop better sign language translation systems.

## 5 Conclusion

We propose ISLTranslate , a dataset of 31k ISL-English pairs for ISL. We provide a detailed insight into the proposed dataset and benchmark them using a sign language transformer-based ISL-pose-to-English architecture. Our experiments highlight the poor performance of the baseline model, pointing towards a significant scope for improvement for end-to-end Indian sign language translation systems. We hope that ISLTranslate will create excitement in the sign language research community and have a significant societal impact.

## Limitations

This resource paper proposes a new dataset and experiments with a baseline model only. We do not focus on creating new models and architectures. In the future, we plan to create models that perform much better on the ISLTranslate dataset. Moreover, the dataset has only 31K video-sentence pairs, and we plan to extend this to enable more reliable data-driven model development. In the future, we would also like to incorporate ISL linguistic knowledge in data-driven models.

## Ethical Concerns

We create a dataset from publicly available resources without violating copyright. We are not aware of any ethical concerns regarding our dataset. Moreover, the dataset involves people of Indian origin and is created mainly for Indian Sign Language translation. The annotator involved in the dataset validation is a hard-of-hearing person and an ISL instructor, and they performed the validation voluntarily.

## Acknowledgements

We want to thank anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. We want to thank Dr. Andesha Mangla ( [https://islrtc.nic.in/dr-andesha-mangla](https://islrtc.nic.in/dr-andesha-mangla) ) for helping in translating and validating a subset of the ISLTranslate dataset.

## References

- Albanie et al. (2020) Samuel Albanie, Gül Varol, Liliane Momeni, Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon Son Chung, Neil Fox, and Andrew Zisserman. 2020. BSL-1K: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition using mouthing cues. In *ECCV* .
- Albanie et al. (2021) Samuel Albanie, Gül Varol, Liliane Momeni, Hannah Bull, Triantafyllos Afouras, Himel Chowdhury, Neil Fox, Bencie Woll, Rob Cooper, Andrew McParland, and Andrew Zisserman. 2021. BOBSL: BBC-Oxford British Sign Language Dataset.
- Camgoz et al. (2018) Necati Cihan Camgoz, Simon Hadfield, Oscar Koller, Hermann Ney, and Richard Bowden. 2018. [Neural sign language translation](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00812) . In *2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition* , pages 7784-7793.
- Camgoz et al. (2020) Necati Cihan Camgoz, Oscar Koller, Simon Hadfield, and Richard Bowden. 2020. Sign language transformers: Joint end-to-end sign language recognition and translation. In *IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* .
- Camgöz et al. (2021) Necati Cihan Camgöz, Ben Saunders, Guillaume Rochette, Marco Giovanelli, Giacomo Inches, Robin Nachtrab-Ribback, and Richard Bowden. 2021. [Content4all open research sign language translation datasets](https://doi.org/10.1109/FG52635.2021.9667087) . In *2021 16th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG 2021)* , page 1-5. IEEE Press.
- De Coster and Dambre (2022) Mathieu De Coster and Joni Dambre. 2022. [Leveraging frozen pretrained written language models for neural sign language translation](https://doi.org/10.3390/info13050220) . *Information* , 13(5).
- De Coster et al. (2021) Mathieu De Coster, Karel D'Oosterlinck, Marija Pizurica, Paloma Rabaey, Severine Verlinden, Mieke Van Herreweghe, and Joni Dambre. 2021. Frozen pretrained transformers for neural sign language translation. In *1st International Workshop on Automated Translation for Signed and Spoken Languages* .
- Dreuw et al. (2007) Philippe Dreuw, David Rybach, Thomas Deselaers, Morteza Zahedi, and Hermann Ney. 2007. [Speech recognition techniques for a sign language recognition system](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2007-668) . In *Proc. Interspeech 2007* , pages 2513-2516.
- Duarte et al. (2021) Amanda Duarte, Shruti Palaskar, Lucas Ventura, Deepti Ghadiyaram, Kenneth DeHaan, Florian Metze, Jordi Torres, and Xavier Giro-i Nieto. 2021. How2Sign: A Large-scale Multimodal Dataset for Continuous American Sign Language. In *Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* .
- Elakkiya and Natarajan (2021) R Elakkiya and B Natarajan. 2021. Isl-csltr: Indian sign language dataset for continuous sign language translation and recognition. *Mendeley Data* .
- Jiang et al. (2021) Songyao Jiang, Bin Sun, Lichen Wang, Yue Bai, Kunpeng Li, and Yun Fu. 2021. Skeleton aware multi-modal sign language recognition. In *Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops* .
- Joshi et al. (2022) Abhinav Joshi, Ashwani Bhat, Pradeep S, Priya Gole, Shashwat Gupta, Shreyansh Agarwal, and Ashutosh Modi. 2022. [CISLR: Corpus for Indian Sign Language recognition](https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.707) . In *Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)* .
- Kingma and Ba (2014) Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2014. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. *arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980* .
- Ko et al. (2018) Sang-Ki Ko, Chang Jo Kim, Hyedong Jung, and Choong Sang Cho. 2018. Neural sign language translation based on human keypoint estimation. *ArXiv* , abs/1811.11436.
- Koller et al. (2015) Oscar Koller, Jens Forster, and Hermann Ney. 2015. Continuous sign language recognition: Towards large vocabulary statistical recognition systems handling multiple signers. *Computer Vision and Image Understanding* , 141:108-125.
- Li et al. (2020) Dongxu Li, Cristian Rodriguez, Xin Yu, and Hongdong Li. 2020. Word-level deep sign language recognition from video: A new large-scale dataset and methods comparison. In *The IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision* , pages 1459-1469.
- Lin (2004) Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. [ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries](https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013) . In *Text Summarization Branches Out* , pages 74-81, Barcelona, Spain. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Martinez et al. (2002) Aleix M. Martinez, Ronnie B. Wilbur, Robin Shay, and Avinash C. Kak. 2002. Purdue rvl-slll asl database for automatic recognition of american sign language. *Proceedings. Fourth IEEE International Conference on Multimodal Interfaces* , pages 167-172.
- Moryossef et al. (2020) Amit Moryossef, Ioannis Tsochantaridis, Roee Aharoni, Sarah Ebling, and Srini Narayanan. 2020. Real-time sign language detection using human pose estimation. In *European Conference on Computer Vision* , pages 237-248. Springer.
- Papineni et al. (2002) Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. [Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation](https://doi.org/10.3115/1073083.1073135) . In *Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics* , pages 311-318, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Radford et al. (2022) Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever. 2022. [Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision](https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2212.04356) .
- Saunders et al. (2020) Ben Saunders, Necati Cihan Camgoz, and Richard Bowden. 2020. Progressive Transformers for End-to-End Sign Language Production. In *Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV)* .
- Selvaraj et al. (2022) Prem Selvaraj, Gokul Nc, Pratyush Kumar, and Mitesh Khapra. 2022. [OpenHands: Making sign language recognition accessible with pose-based pretrained models across languages](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.150) . In *Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)* , pages 2114-2133, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Shi et al. (2022) Bowen Shi, Diane Brentari, Greg Shakhnarovich, and Karen Livescu. 2022. [Open-domain sign language translation learned from online video](https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2205.12870) .
- Sincan and Keles (2020) Ozge Mercanoglu Sincan and Hacer Yalim Keles. 2020. Autsl: A large scale multi-modal turkish sign language dataset and baseline methods. *IEEE Access* , 8:181340-181355.
- Tunstall et al. (2022) Lewis Tunstall, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. 2022. *Natural language processing with transformers* . " O'Reilly Media, Inc.".
- Voskou et al. (2021) Andreas Voskou, Konstantinos P. Panousis, Dimitrios I. Kosmopoulos, Dimitris N. Metaxas, and Sotirios P. Chatzis. 2021. Stochastic transformer networks with linear competing units: Application to end-to-end sl translation. *2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)* , pages 11926-11935.
- Xu et al. (2022) Chenchen Xu, Dongxu Li, Hongdong Li, Hanna Suominen, and Ben Swift. 2022. [Automatic gloss dictionary for sign language learners](https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-demo.8) . In *Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations* , pages 83-92, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Yin et al. (2021) Kayo Yin, Amit Moryossef, Julie Hochgesang, Yoav Goldberg, and Malihe Alikhani. 2021. [Including signed languages in natural language processing](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.570) . In *Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers)* , pages 7347-7360, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
- Yin and Read (2020) Kayo Yin and Jesse Read. 2020. [Better sign language translation with STMC-transformer](https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.525) . In *Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics* , pages 5975-5989, Barcelona, Spain (Online). International Committee on Computational Linguistics.
- Zhou et al. (2021) Hao Zhou, Wen gang Zhou, Weizhen Qi, Junfu Pu, and Houqiang Li. 2021. Improving sign language translation with monolingual data by sign back-translation. *2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)* , pages 1316-1325.

## Appendix

## Appendix A Data Splits

Data splits for ISLTranslate are shown in Table [5](#A1.T5) .

## Appendix B ISLTranslate Word Distribution

Figure 3: Distribution of the number of samples in the train, validation, and test splits of ISLTranslate .

<!-- image -->

## Appendix C Annotation Details

We asked a certified ISL instructor to translate and validate a random subset from the dataset. The instructor is a hard-of-hearing person and uses ISL for communication; hence they are aware of the subtitles of ISL. Moreover, the instructor is an assistant professor of sign language linguistics. The instructor is employed with ISLRTC, the organization involved in creating the sign language content; however, the instructor did not participate in videos in ISLTranslate . The instructor performed the validation voluntarily. It took the instructor about 3 hours to validate 100 sentences. They generated the English translations by looking at the video.

Figure 4: The figure shows an example of the educational content video where the signer signs for the corresponding textbook.

<!-- image -->

## Appendix D Hyperparameters and Training

We follow the code base of SLT Camgoz et al. ( [2020](#bib.bib4) ) to train and develop the proposed SLT-based pose-to-text architecture by modifying the input features to be sign-pose sequences generated by the mediapipe. The model architecture is a transformer-based encoder-decoder consisting of 3 3 3 transformer layers each for both encoder and decoder.

We use the Adam optimizer Kingma and Ba (

[2014](#bib.bib13) ) with a learning rate of 0.0001, β = ( 0.9 , 0.999 ) 𝛽 0.9 0.999 \beta=(0.9,0.999) and weight decay of 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 for training the proposed baseline with a batch size of 32.

## References

- [[a02fbaf22237a1aedacb1320b6007cd70c1fe6ec]] — Robust Speech Recognition via Large-Scale Weak Supervision (2022)
- [[be54fc78e86fb3e65964fbfb904f22eb9927502f]] — Open-Domain Sign Language Translation Learned from Online Video (2022)
- [[442d305bd29ee84fb1c4fbac0cb56ee27731fb1f]] — Leveraging Frozen Pretrained Written Language Models for Neural Sign Language Translation (2022)
- [[3826b47d3e8a7ef99d8c757c778e7d11633df84e]] — BBC-Oxford British Sign Language Dataset (2021)
- [[2dc5bd35be89eaa336384a3b8cd4b611485c1602]] — OpenHands: Making Sign Language Recognition Accessible with Pose-based Pretrained Models across Languages (2021)
- [[9e890135a6e2034518a31be9b3e69a1a34ef2706]] — Stochastic Transformer Networks with Linear Competing Units: Application to end-to-end SL Translation (2021)
- [[7811df11a75f58646d04b3132d35f0656e50a109]] — Improving Sign Language Translation with Monolingual Data by Sign Back-Translation (2021)
- [[c4358134954d8e62939c3a8b9ba8e953d951f73b]] — Including Signed Languages in Natural Language Processing (2021)
- [[06f18e61b6f8c7b04e512b93388bc2b341327993]] — Content4All Open Research Sign Language Translation Datasets (2021)
- [[4c4246390cbb9c81264c7e89afe89afef7c69610]] — Skeleton Aware Multi-modal Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[c4fcc56599ac65d5b274aaf98b7de426079b1958]] — ISL-CSLTR: Indian Sign Language Dataset for Continuous Sign Language Translation and Recognition (2021)
- [[932168d1c27390506049adf679b42d3aac53f61c]] — How2Sign: A Large-scale Multimodal Dataset for Continuous American Sign Language (2020)
- [[7eda262bf812d0293dca67f34ef47ce53a3b268b]] — Real-Time Sign Language Detection using Human Pose Estimation (2020)
- [[14cc503211af3ba271e0ebee622e0439c693793f]] — AUTSL: A Large Scale Multi-Modal Turkish Sign Language Dataset and Baseline Methods (2020)
- [[fe6c2b21f6086c375f4e211efb6c4d6479d54f01]] — BSL-1K: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition using mouthing cues (2020)
- [[5a65e6184d18cd93ccbaa4d940a27749358ef824]] — Progressive Transformers for End-to-End Sign Language Production (2020)
- [[7153c3b129f1e6423dea6afcdbb57466466cd2cc]] — Better Sign Language Translation with STMC-Transformer (2020)
- [[05dcdfece56d1869895f53ed581d8ad64118c05f]] — Sign Language Transformers: Joint End-to-End Sign Language Recognition and Translation (2020)
- [[874063b6c71aef8382eb66a66d8a1c1188e78a9a]] — Word-level Deep Sign Language Recognition from Video: A New Large-scale Dataset and Methods Comparison (2019)
- [[74669631d3f1fcc06d0e5e5daa7e4bfd5b6f6b59]] — Neural Sign Language Translation based on Human Keypoint Estimation (2018)
- [[644602c65a5d8f30e62be027eb7b47f7c335191a]] — Neural Sign Language Translation (2018)
- [[562737212e6e63c75689a28f72d132ee3183cff3]] — Continuous sign language recognition: Towards large vocabulary statistical recognition systems handling multiple signers (2015)
- [[a6cb366736791bcccc5c8639de5a8f9636bf87e8]] — Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization (2014)
- [[60b05f32c32519a809f21642ef1eb3eaf3848008]] — ROUGE: A Package for Automatic Evaluation of Summaries (2004)
- [[d7da009f457917aa381619facfa5ffae9329a6e9]] — Bleu: a Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation (2002)
- [[cc9241a2922ac85173ad60db04f3e151c5bfdc46]] — Automatic Gloss Dictionary for Sign Language Learners (2022)
- [[dfe0315936e55c01484cd5dc36661d42f405b592]] — CISLR: Corpus for Indian Sign Language Recognition (2022)
- Natural language processing with transformers . " O ’ Reilly Media , Inc . " . Andreas Voskou (2022)
- [[7cc9d291d947c3321e74a909a0984cb233a9f6e2]] — Frozen Pretrained Transformers for Neural Sign Language Translation (2021)
- Stochastic transformer networks with 10472 (2021)
- [[44bbf2a58bfd7b19a1289ecb37c1e516d5421010]] — Not applicable (2012)
- [[b31918bc5002cf81d4b243e73890aa49c1262ecb]] — Speech recognition techniques for a sign language recognition system (2007)
- [[8a205362fe1678e7972c37194c1ebd2cff8f1e4c]] — Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Multimodel Interfaces, 2002 ()
- error bars around results, summary statistics from sets of experiments), and is it transparent whether you are reporting the max, mean, etc ()
- Did you discuss the experimental setup, including hyperparameter search and best-found hyperparameter values? Section ()

## Cited by

- [[aa9c98db70bc090b0466f318c77b4a02cfbf6ec6]] — AI tool/app for Indian Sign Language (ISL) generator from audio-visual content in English/Hindi to ISL content and vice versa (2025)
- [[2042d7bcfd499f516f313024bb2a59dba1e80380]] — Deep Learning for Inclusive Communication: A CNN-Based Approach to Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[21d0263664ae265a761af82f8c016f9a194e804b]] — Visual Intelligence for Indian Sign Language: Techniques and Trends in Recognition (2025)
- [[a9cbe212402c873d5a7b0c65112ac38110f365f8]] — Indian Sign Language Recognition: Model Evaluation and Implementation Based on Custom Metrics (2025)
- [[342c444fe54d5e4e92f979a0729054824c428b62]] — Enhancing Real-Time Communication with a Smart Glove: LSTM Based Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[f21b9d6b967f0c9d9bdcc22a1fcad9bab01c1224]] — An End-to-End Vision-Based Approach for Indian Sign Language Recognition and Captioning (2025)
- [[682f4034a36fa62a9b3b6ed19b2ec3f5790efbad]] — Indian Sign Language Detection Using Lightweight Architecture (2025)
- [[360e6caa33ed934121904bbad3dfbecebe6df8f0]] — Gesturely: A Conversation AI based Indian Sign Language Model (2025)
- [[4aa98609bc6eee7140445cbf9a9b762e5bb3f35c]] — An integrative survey on Indian sign language recognition and translation (2025)
- [[a583b9c01e17493d110e59d001ae8ab2135e99cc]] — Machine Learning based ISL Identification and Translation (2024)
- [[0bb682b79a85450b09c6bab9a4d244a577c9dc5f]] — Marathi Text to ISL Gloss Translation Using LSTM, GRU and Transformer Neural Models (2024)
- [[f02baaa33f013dc72768191925957b66fe6783f5]] — Overcoming Modality Bias in Question-Driven Sign Language Video Translation (2024)
- [[8ea7e8c2f51bed676536e65dd2294d053f71aa1f]] — Predicting Indian Sign Language Gestures Using Deep Learning and Machine Learning Techniques (2024)
- [[d15bad433d742df673eae5e1b21c8864d1c69bb6]] — A Real-Time English Audio to Indian Sign Language Converter for Enhanced Communication Accessibility (2024)
- [[ec3913dfc412629d18bafc0bd0e2da10fa405ae2]] — BdSLW60: A word-level bangla sign language dataset (2024)
- [[1f1662b0fc27e14d91cce87e60a4b63a1d6e484b]] — Comprehensive study of Sign Language Conversion Using Machine Learning (2023)
- [[0cc7e7abb1b4da2b50646284a8c64df205df9b5a]] — A Comprehensive Review of Sign Language Translation Technologies Using Linguistic Approaches (2023)

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: ar5iv
- bibtex: ours
