---
semanticScholarId: "af49e0dd9684a96b2502b4ebf8f8d1fd7ae66ce4"
bibKey: "Duarte2022SignVideoRetrivalWithTextQueries"
year: 2022
title: "Sign Language Video Retrieval with Free-Form Textual Queries"
doi: "10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01370"
arxivId: "2201.02495"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: ours
---

# Sign Language Video Retrieval with Free-Form Textual Queries

**Year:** [[2022]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** A. Duarte; Samuel Albanie; Xavier Gir'o-i-Nieto; Gül Varol

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af49e0dd9684a96b2502b4ebf8f8d1fd7ae66ce4)
- [PDF](https://upcommons.upc.edu/bitstream/2117/373923/3/_CVPR_22__Amanda.pdf)
- [arXiv:2201.02495](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.02495)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01370)

## Abstract

Systems that can efficiently search collections of sign language videos have been highlighted as a useful application of sign language technology. However, the problem of searching videos beyond individual keywords has received limited attention in the literature. To address this gap, in this work we introduce the task of sign language retrieval with free-form11The terminology “natural language query” is commonly used to describe unconstrained textual queries in spoken languages. However, since sign languages are also natural languages, we adopt for the term “free-form textual query” instead. textual queries: given a written query (e.g. a sentence) and a large collection of sign language videos, the objective is to find the signing video that best matches the written query. We propose to tackle this task by learning cross-modal embeddings on the recently introduced large-scale How2Sign dataset of American Sign Language (ASL). We identify that a key bottleneck in the performance of the system is the quality of the sign video embedding which suffers from a scarcity of labelled training data. We, therefore, propose SPOT-ALIGN, a framework for interleaving iterative rounds of sign spotting and feature alignment to expand the scope and scale of available training data. We validate the effectiveness of SPOT-ALIGN for learning a robust sign video embedding through improvements in both sign recognition and the proposed video retrieval task.

## TL;DR

SPOT-ALIGN is proposed, a framework for interleaving iterative rounds of sign spotting and feature alignment to expand the scope and scale of available training data and validate the effectiveness of SPOT-alIGN for learning a robust sign video embedding.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{Duarte2022SignVideoRetrivalWithTextQueries,
 author = {Amanda Cardoso Duarte and
Samuel Albanie and
Xavier Gir{\'{o}}{-}i{-}Nieto and
G{\"{u}}l Varol},
 bibsource = {dblp computer science bibliography, https://dblp.org},
 biburl = {https://dblp.org/rec/conf/cvpr/DuarteAGV22.bib},
 booktitle = {{IEEE/CVF} Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
{CVPR} 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 18-24, 2022},
 doi = {10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01370},
 pages = {14074--14084},
 publisher = {{IEEE}},
 timestamp = {Wed, 05 Oct 2022 01:00:00 +0200},
 title = {Sign Language Video Retrieval with Free-Form Textual Queries},
 url = {https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01370},
 year = {2022}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: ours
