---
semanticScholarId: "b6aa7b6dea78cfcd41ec7cbcc388629073fe178e"
bibKey: null
year: 2022
title: "Support in the Moment: Benefits and use of video-span selection and search for sign-language video comprehension among ASL learners"
doi: "10.1145/3517428.3544883"
arxivId: null
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Education", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Support in the Moment: Benefits and use of video-span selection and search for sign-language video comprehension among ASL learners

**Year:** [[2022]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/education|Education]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Saad Hassan; Akhter Al Amin; Caluã de Lacerda Pataca; Diego Navarro; Alexis Gordon; Sooyeon Lee; Matt Huenerfauth

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6aa7b6dea78cfcd41ec7cbcc388629073fe178e)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1145/3517428.3544883)

## Abstract

As they develop comprehension skills, American Sign Language (ASL) learners often view challenging ASL videos, which may contain unfamiliar signs. Current dictionary tools require students to isolate a single sign they do not understand and input a search query, by selecting linguistic properties or by performing the sign into a webcam. Students may struggle with extracting and re-creating an unfamiliar sign, and they must leave the video-watching task to use an external dictionary tool. We investigate a technology that enables users, in the moment, i.e., while they are viewing a video, to select a span of one or more signs that they do not understand, to view dictionary results. We interviewed 14 American Sign Language (ASL) learners about their challenges in understanding ASL video and workarounds for unfamiliar vocabulary. We then conducted a comparative study and an in-depth analysis with 15 ASL learners to investigate the benefits of using video sub-spans for searching, and their interactions with a Wizard-of-Oz prototype during a video-comprehension task. Our findings revealed benefits of our tool in terms of quality of video translation produced and perceived workload to produce translations. Our in-depth analysis also revealed benefits of an integrated search tool and use of span-selection to constrain video play. These findings inform future designers of such systems, computer vision researchers working on the underlying sign matching technologies, and sign language educators.

## TL;DR

A technology that enables users, in the moment, to select a span of one or more signs that they do not understand, to view dictionary results is investigated, which will inform future designers of such systems, computer vision researchers working on the underlying sign matching technologies, and sign language educators.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Book{Hassan2022SupportIT,
 author = {Saad Hassan and Akhter Al Amin and Caluã de Lacerda Pataca and Diego Navarro and Alexis Gordon and Sooyeon Lee and Matt Huenerfauth},
 booktitle = {International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility},
 journal = {Proceedings of the 24th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility},
 title = {Support in the Moment: Benefits and use of video-span selection and search for sign-language video comprehension among ASL learners},
 year = {2022}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
