---
semanticScholarId: "bddfbe42681d37a1101b5b59651ba3b596048143"
bibKey: null
year: 2024
title: "Training Strategies for Isolated Sign Language Recognition"
doi: "10.48550/arXiv.2412.11553"
arxivId: "2412.11553"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "ar5iv"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: ar5iv
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Training Strategies for Isolated Sign Language Recognition

**Year:** [[2024]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Karina Kvanchiani; Roman Kraynov; Elizaveta Petrova; Petr Surovcev; Aleksandr Nagaev; A. Kapitanov

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bddfbe42681d37a1101b5b59651ba3b596048143)
- [arXiv:2412.11553](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11553)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.11553)

## Abstract

Accurate recognition and interpretation of sign language are crucial for enhancing communication accessibility for deaf and hard of hearing individuals. However, current approaches of Isolated Sign Language Recognition (ISLR) often face challenges such as low data quality and variability in gesturing speed. This paper introduces a comprehensive model training pipeline for ISLR designed to accommodate the distinctive characteristics and constraints of the Sign Language (SL) domain. The constructed pipeline incorporates carefully selected image and video augmentations to tackle the challenges of low data quality and varying sign speeds. Including an additional regression head combined with IoU-balanced classification loss enhances the model's awareness of the gesture and simplifies capturing temporal information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the developed training pipeline easily adapts to different datasets and architectures. Additionally, the ablation study shows that each proposed component expands the potential to consider ISLR task specifics. The presented strategies enhance recognition performance across various ISLR benchmarks and achieve state-of-the-art results on the WLASL and Slovo datasets.

## TL;DR

This paper introduces a comprehensive model training pipeline for ISLR designed to accommodate the distinctive characteristics and constraints of the Sign Language (SL) domain, and incorporates carefully selected image and video augmentations to tackle the challenges of low data quality and varying sign speeds.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Kvanchiani2024TrainingSF,
 author = {Karina Kvanchiani and Roman Kraynov and Elizaveta Petrova and Petr Surovcev and Aleksandr Nagaev and A. Kapitanov},
 booktitle = {Journal of WSCG},
 journal = {ArXiv},
 title = {Training Strategies for Isolated Sign Language Recognition},
 volume = {abs/2412.11553},
 year = {2024}
}
```

## Full Text

# Training Strategies for Isolated Sign Language Recognition

Karina Kvanchiani karinakvanciani@gmail.com Roman Kraynov ranakraynov@gmail.com Elizaveta Petrova kleinsbotle@gmail.com Petr Surovcev petr.surovcev@gmail.com Aleksandr Nagaev sashanagaev1111@gmail.com Alexander Kapitanov kapitanovalexander@gmail.com SberDevices, Russia

###### Abstract

This paper introduces a comprehensive model training pipeline for Isolated Sign Language Recognition (ISLR) designed to accommodate the distinctive characteristics and constraints of the Sign Language (SL) domain. The constructed pipeline incorporates carefully selected image and video augmentations to tackle the challenges of low data quality and varying sign speeds. Including an additional regression head combined with IoU-balanced classification loss enhances the model's awareness of the gesture and simplifies capturing temporal information. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the developed training pipeline easily adapts to different datasets and architectures. Additionally, the ablation study shows that each proposed component expands the potential to consider ISLR task specifics. The presented strategies improve recognition performance on a broad set of ISLR benchmarks. Moreover, we achieved a state-of-the-art result on the WLASL and Slovo benchmarks with 1.63% and 14.12% improvements compared to the previous best solution, respectively.

## 1 Introduction

Sign Languages (SL) are the primary means of communication for many deaf and hard of hearing individuals 1 1 1 According to data from the All-Russian Society of the Deaf ( [VOG](https://voginfo.ru/all-russian-society-of-the-deaf/) ), there were more than 150 thousand native speakers of Russian Sign Language (RSL) in 2019. . Such languages do not replicate spoken speech but exhibit their own lexicon and unique grammatical rules. Due to the language gap, deaf and hard of hearing people may experience heightened prejudice in finding employment, pursuing academic education, or accessing medical services. Furthermore, learning sign language is challenging due to the limited number of teachers and native speakers who can help with communication practice.

Figure 1 : The process of receiving IoU scores. (a) Consider the initial video, where the sign is between frames 2 and 5. (b) Random shift the sign's boundaries by one frame to enhance model robustness (see Section 3.1 for details). (c) Collect frames by sliding a window of size 3 across the video. (d) Calculate IoU scores by dividing the number of sign frames in the window by the window size and adjust the classification scores (see Equation 2 ).

<!-- image -->

Sign language understanding is covered by three primary tasks: ISLR (Isolated Sign Language Recognition), CSLR (Continuous Sign Language Recognition), and SLT (Sign Language Translation). We begin the research of training strategies for SL problems with ISLR, which represents the video classification into individual signs. One of the beneficial applications of this task is to create an automatic sign language trainer, where users are shown a video example of a sign, and the recognition system assesses the quality of human gesturing. This advancement could make the learning of sign languages more accessible.

The development of automatic sign language recognition systems is becoming widespread [ [18](#bib.bib18) , [10](#bib.bib10) ] to facilitate communication between deaf and hearing individuals. SLR is a complex challenge due to the impact of hand movement, location, orientation, shape, and facial expressions on sign meaning [ [34](#bib.bib34) ] . The SLR system should function in real-world settings (schools, hospitals, or train stations). This limitation introduces several hardships, including variations in sign display speeds, low video quality and resolution, diverse backgrounds, and varying lighting conditions. These factors adversely affect the system, which must operate with real-time response and achieve high quality since an error can have significant consequences. Besides real-world limitations, SLR is notably challenging due to the domain specifics, including the lack of available data and the direct temporal dependencies in videos.

Figure 2 : Overall training pipeline. Video-level and image-level augmentations are applied, and the neural network is further trained with augmented data and sign boundary annotations.

<!-- image -->

The basic approach to the ISLR task involves a classification neural network designed to process RGB video data. The model takes the sequence of frames sampled from the video as input and predicts a text label corresponding to the sign depicted in the video. The majority of current methodologies within this field provide either a solution at the model level [ [7](#bib.bib7) , [45](#bib.bib45) , [15](#bib.bib15) ] , involving alterations to the model architecture, or at the data level [ [47](#bib.bib47) ] , focusing on expanding the training data. In this work, we emphasize selecting an effective training strategy that considers the specificity of real-world SLR. Such a strategy holds the potential for substantial improvement without drastic alterations to the model or the dataset.

To address the domain-specific and real-world limitations, we propose a set of modifications for the basic approach, significantly enhancing the model quality across different datasets and architectures, including transformers [ [26](#bib.bib26) , [38](#bib.bib38) ] and convolution neural networks (CNNs) [ [5](#bib.bib5) ] : (1) video-level data augmentations to simulate the different gesturing speeds (shown in Figure [3](#S2.F3) ); (2) image-level data augmentations to reproduce low video quality; (3) an auxiliary sign boundary regression head to direct the network to focus more on the frames containing signs; and (4) 1D IoU-balanced CrossEntropy (IoU-balanced CE) loss to enhance the model's capability to understand signs (see Figure [1](#S1.F1) ). Considering the necessity for real-time response, we focus on modifying strategies solely based on RGB data without additional modalities like hand keypoints [ [30](#bib.bib30) ] and depth [ [21](#bib.bib21) , [30](#bib.bib30) ] information.

The contribution of this paper is fourfold:

- • The versatile and scalable to various languages training pipeline for the ISLR models was created by considering the central of the task specifics.
- • The novel large-scale dataset, SlovoExt which combines the Slovo [ [23](#bib.bib23) ] dataset with the newly assembled Russian Isolated Sign Language Dataset, detailed in Section [4](#S4) . The code and pre-trained models are released to open-source 2 2 2 https://github.com/ai-forever/TrainingStrategiesISLR to facilitate further research in the field. The SlovoExt dataset will be open-sourced as a part of an enormous RSL dataset in our future work.
- • Extensive experiments show that in comparison to the basic solution, MViTv2-S trained using the proposed pipeline is capable of achieving an increase of 6.54%, 3.93%, 10.12%, and 5.76% in top-1 accuracy on WLASL, AUTSL, Slovo and SlovoExt datasets, respectively. Table [3](#S5.T3) shows the results of the ablation study of three proposed component blocks.
- • The state-of-the-art performance on two SLR datasets: (1) an 1.63% improvement relative to NLA-SLR [ [48](#bib.bib48) ] model on the widely-used American Sign Language benchmark WLASL [ [25](#bib.bib25) ] with 62.89 top-1 accuracy; (2) a 14.12% advancement relative to solution on the Russian Sign Language dataset Slovo with 78.21% mean accuracy. Such results are achieved by utilizing the presented pipeline with several additionals described in Section [5.4](#S5.SS4) .

## 2 Related Work

Figure 3 : Applying video augmentations to untrimmed videos. Identical frames are highlighted in the same color, and sign boundaries are outlined with a dashed line. Grey boundaries indicate duplicates of the last frame. a) speed up the video 2 times by removing every second frame; b) slow down the video 2 times by duplicating every second frame; c) random frames drop remains 80% of the total video length; d) random frames duplication increases the total video length by 20%; e) random boundary shift is applied, e.g., with shift of (1, -1), which means one frame is added on the left and one is removed on the right.

<!-- image -->

In this section, we present a summary of the SLR training strategies utilized within the proposed pipeline. We observe the widespread SLR studies and additionally consider action recognition and temporal action localization tasks.

Sign Language Recognition Training Heuristics. Most works in the SLR field implemented model architecture-level alterations to improve performance. In the [ [14](#bib.bib14) ] , self-mutual distillation was employed to enable the model to learn temporal and spatial features. In the [ [15](#bib.bib15) ] , authors used correlation and identification modules to capture hands and face trajectories more effectively across consecutive frames. Other researchers employed data-based approaches to boost their model. The authors of [ [47](#bib.bib47) ] utilized datasets of various sign languages for training to address the issue of insufficient data. Some approaches incorporated not only RGB but also pose information [ [4](#bib.bib4) ] , hand and body keypoints [ [22](#bib.bib22) , [7](#bib.bib7) , [45](#bib.bib45) ] , and mouthing cues [ [33](#bib.bib33) ] , combining data- and model-level modifications. This paper focuses on developing a training pipeline to be applied to any ISLR model that takes RGB videos as input and outputs classification scores.

Image &amp; Video Augmentations. Numerous studies focusing on SLR employed random crop [ [6](#bib.bib6) , [7](#bib.bib7) , [31](#bib.bib31) , [1](#bib.bib1) , [35](#bib.bib35) ] and horizontal flip [ [14](#bib.bib14) , [31](#bib.bib31) , [1](#bib.bib1) , [35](#bib.bib35) ] as standard image augmentations. However, these studies should address handling non-mirrored signs, which should be kept the same since altering them could change their meaning. [ [44](#bib.bib44) ] utilized strong data augmentation techniques such as geometric and color space transformation to enhance the model's robustness to data perturbations. We do not include such modifications due to inconsistency with real-life scenarios.

Video augmentations are widely utilized in the action recognition task to enhance the model's capacity to capture temporal dependencies. However, actions in this task (e.g., walking or running) are frequently repetitive and can be correctly classified at any time. On the contrary, the order of movements is essential in the SLR task. Such specific is the main reason for the impossibility of applying some of the proposed transformations in [ [12](#bib.bib12) ] , where authors augmented data with video reversing, frame mixing, and temporal extension of CutMix [ [41](#bib.bib41) ] . In the [ [35](#bib.bib35) ] , the authors proposed a video augmentation method where part of the video frames corresponding to one gesture are removed, added, or replaced with frames depicting a different gesture within the same video. This technique allowed authors to address the data deficiency and leverage the contextual information within the sign sequence. In this paper, we only remove and add frames ("speed up" and "slow down" in Section [3.1](#S3.SS1) ) to speed adjustments because replacing is unsuitable for the ISLR task, given only individual signs. [ [1](#bib.bib1) ] used different frame sampling rates to capture spatial and temporal information separately. We adopt a similar approach with randomness ("random add" and "random drop" in Section [3.1](#S3.SS1) ) to simulate real-life SLR cases. Such video augmentations, shown in Figure [3](#S2.F3) , enable sign recognition regardless of display speed and address data insufficiency in the SLR task.

Auxiliary Regression Task. Localizing the action boundaries via regression loss can be beneficial when solving the action recognition task. It allowed the authors from [ [42](#bib.bib42) ] to achieve single-stage anchor-free temporal action localization. [ [46](#bib.bib46) ] also divided the task of temporal action localization into classification and action boundary regression and applied L1 loss for the second. As was stated in [ [27](#bib.bib27) ] , supplementary tasks can boost the performance of the main task by pushing the backbone toward learning robust and generalized representations. Considering this concept, we incorporate an auxiliary sign boundary regression task by adding the regression head optimized by Huber loss [ [16](#bib.bib16) ] into the training pipeline. It assists the model in understanding the temporal position of the sign within the video, allowing it to focus more on the frames containing the sign.

Intersection-over-Union Loss. Extracting information about an object's spatial and temporal boundaries proves beneficial in both action recognition [ [40](#bib.bib40) ] and sign language recognition tasks [ [19](#bib.bib19) , [33](#bib.bib33) ] . Techniques like IoU-loss [ [19](#bib.bib19) , [29](#bib.bib29) , [39](#bib.bib39) ] can aid this process. The authors [ [39](#bib.bib39) ] proposed employing the IoU-balanced CE loss to address the problem of the classification loss independence of localization predictions. [ [29](#bib.bib29) ] employed the 1D IoU loss in the action detection task to localize the video segment containing the action. [ [19](#bib.bib19) ] applied the Generalized IoU loss for sign language recognition: the model processed images depicting signs and calculated IoU between bounding boxes of hands within the frame. In the proposed pipeline, we combine the concepts of 1D IoU and the IoU-balanced classification losses to devise the classification IoU loss tailored for the video domain and the particularities of the ISLR task. When computing the classification score, this approach allows us to consider the relative localization of the sign (see Figure [1](#S1.F1) for details).

## 3 Training Strategies

Due to the specificity of the sign language domain, the design of a training pipeline requires particular approaches that consider both the data and the model requirements. Figure [2](#S1.F2) shows the proposed strategies divided into three components: (1) video-level augmentations, (2) image-level augmentations, and (3) additional losses. Note that these techniques can be utilized with any SL dataset and architecture except for several subcomponents mentioned in Section [3.2](#S3.SS2) .

### 3.1 Video Augmentations

Video augmentations are designed to reduce the gap between real cases and training data regarding subjects' gesturing speedby artificially changing the speed and shifting the sign boundaries.

Speed Up &amp; Slow Down. In real life, signs are shown at various speeds, which poses challenges in crowding a dataset with a real-like distribution due to a limited number of sign language speakers. Therefore, during model training, we artificially speed up or slow down the video recordings without overstepping the limits of gesturing speed encountered in the real world. We sample every N-th frame from the video sequence to speed up the video by a factor of N, where N is an integer (see Figure [3](#S2.F3) a). The additional frames from the original video are pre-sampled to the right to maintain the clip length after acceleration. We repeat each frame N times to slow down the video (see Figure [3](#S2.F3) b), pre-dropping the frames on the right so that after the subsequent addition, the clip length remains the initial.

Random Add &amp; Random Drop. In some real-life scenarios, gesturing speed is non-uniform because of the difficulty or simplicity of some gesture parts or due to external distractions during the showing. We partially change the speed of the videos to make the model more resistant to such uncommon cases. Figure [3](#S2.F3) c illustrates the involvement of a random drop of frames from the video sequence to speed up the video partially (see Algorithm [1](#alg1) ). As in the case of uniform video speed up, we retain the same clip length using the identical process. Similarly, a random add of frames is applied to the video for a partial slow down (see Figure [3](#S2.F3) d). We are maintaining the video length in the same way as in a uniform slow down.

Random Boundary Shift. During inference, an SLR system generally captures frames sequentially with a window of a certain length. So, too short or too long signs may not fit into the window properly. Therefore, to ensure valid recognition of such signs, we augment the data by shifting the sign boundaries by a random value, removing part of the signs, or adding frames without the signs (see Figure [1](#S1.F1) and Figure [3](#S2.F3) e for illustrations).

### 3.2 Image Augmentations

Due to the real-life limitations, the model must be adaptive to variations in background, subjects, image quality, and overall visual appearance. Image augmentations diversify the data in a frame-independent way to simulate real-life cases.

Image Quality. We imitate artifacts in video recordings caused by low-resolution capturing, a defect in the video camera, or problems with video transmission over the network by compressing and downscaling images and adding random noise and sharpness.

Horizontal Flip. Most signs' meanings remain unchanged after horizontal mirroring. Hence, horizontal flip transformation facilitates the equal processing of signs shown by different hands. However, some signs are not invariant to the horizontal flip (e.g., RSL gestures such as "left", "right", "heart", and "liver" stop transferring their meanings if shown with the inappropriate hand). In the experiments, this augmentation only affects mirrored signs (more details in Section [5.1](#S5.SS1) ).

General. In addition to domain-specific augmentations, we utilize general ones to diversify the dataset: color jittering to provide heterogeneity over the color context of the frame, and CutMix [ [41](#bib.bib41) ] and MixUp [ [43](#bib.bib43) ] to induce the model to learn more generalizable features.

### 3.3 Additional Losses

The following domain-specific training techniques incorporate domain knowledge of the sign boundaries into the model by scaling the classification loss and solving an additional task to enhance the main task's solution accuracy. Such modifications are not model-level, as they can be integrated into either architecture.

Sign Boundary Regression Head. The average gesturing speed of various signs may differ, and even the same sign may take a different number of frames, affecting data distribution. Motivated by this, we add the regression head with a fully connected layer parallel to the classification head. This auxiliary head predicts the start and end of a sign in the input video to embed an implicit understanding of the length and gesturing speed into the model's backbone. To train the regression head, we utilize Huber loss [ [16](#bib.bib16) ] , which combines the strengths of both MSE and MAE losses: it offers sensitivity and robustness, being less affected by the influence of outliers.

Classification Loss Scaling. Conventional classification losses like cross-entropy loss have the following limitation: they do not consider information about the localization of the sign in the video, which can cause irrelevant gradients to optimize. We use a IoU-balanced CE loss to incorporate information about the location of the sign relative to the window. To calculate IoU, the length of the intersection of the sign with the sampled window is divided by the size of the window:

|    | I  o  U  =  min  ⁡  (  w  e  n  d  ,  s  e  n  d  )  −  max  ⁡  (  w  s  t  a  r  t  ,  s  s  t  a  r  t  )  w  e  n  d  −  w  s  t  a  r  t  +  1  ,  𝐼  𝑜  𝑈  subscript  𝑤  𝑒  𝑛  𝑑  subscript  𝑠  𝑒  𝑛  𝑑  subscript  𝑤  𝑠  𝑡  𝑎  𝑟  𝑡  subscript  𝑠  𝑠  𝑡  𝑎  𝑟  𝑡  subscript  𝑤  𝑒  𝑛  𝑑  subscript  𝑤  𝑠  𝑡  𝑎  𝑟  𝑡  1  IoU=\frac{\min(w\_{end},s\_{end})-\max(w\_{start},s\_{start})}{w\_{end}-w\_{start}+1},   |    | (1)   |
|----|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|-------|

where s s  t  a  r  t subscript 𝑠 𝑠 𝑡 𝑎 𝑟 𝑡 s\_{start} , w s  t  a  r  t subscript 𝑤 𝑠 𝑡 𝑎 𝑟 𝑡 w\_{start} are the first frames of the sign and the sampled window, and s e  n  d subscript 𝑠 𝑒 𝑛 𝑑 s\_{end} , w e  n  d subscript 𝑤 𝑒 𝑛 𝑑 w\_{end} are the last frames, respectively (for illustration, see Figure [1](#S1.F1) and Figure [2](#S1.F2) ). The overall classification loss is the weighted combination of classification scores and IoU coefficients, denoted as:

|    | ℒ  c  l  s  =  C  r  o  s  s  E  n  t  r  o  p  y  (  i  o  u  i  ∗  p  i  ,  p  ^  i  )  ,  subscript  ℒ  𝑐  𝑙  𝑠  𝐶  𝑟  𝑜  𝑠  𝑠  𝐸  𝑛  𝑡  𝑟  𝑜  𝑝  𝑦  ∗  𝑖  𝑜  subscript  𝑢  𝑖  subscript  𝑝  𝑖  subscript  ^  𝑝  𝑖  \displaystyle\mathcal{L}\_{cls}=CrossEntropy(iou\_{i}\ast p\_{i},\hat{p}\_{i}),   |    | (2)   |
|----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|-------|

where p i subscript 𝑝 𝑖 p\_{i} and p ^ i subscript ^ 𝑝 𝑖 \hat{p}\_{i} are the predicted classification score and its corresponding ground-truth label, and i  o  u i 𝑖 𝑜 subscript 𝑢 𝑖 iou\_{i} is the IoU score of the video.

## 4 Datasets

We assess the training strategies described above on three large-scale ISLR datasets: WLASL [ [25](#bib.bib25) ] , AUTSL [ [37](#bib.bib37) ] , and Slovo [ [23](#bib.bib23) ] . They are the most diverse open-source data in terms of dataset contributors, performing gestures (signers), and contexts (see Table [1](#S4.T1) ). Thus, the evaluation only with them is sufficient to confirm the pipeline's effectiveness.

- • WLASL dataset consists of 21,083 RGB-based videos trimmed by sign boundaries. Each video contains only one sign in American Sign Language (ASL), and each sign is performed by at least 3 different signers in various dialects 3 3 3 There is more than one way to show one word. Therefore, intraclass diversity occurs. . The dataset was recorded in a studio with solid-colored backgrounds. The WLASL contains non-mirrored signs, but since such signs in its vocabulary are not established, we estimate the impact of flip augmentation for all samples in Section [6.1](#S6.SS1) .
- • AUTSL was designed to simulate real-life context, i.e., different indoor and outdoor environments and diverse lighting conditions. It contains 38,336 trimmed video samples with 512 × 512 frame resolution and 20 different backgrounds. The AUTSL is divided into 226 Turkish Sign Language (TSL) signs performed by 43 signers. It comprises numerous similar signs, so models that can extract complex information from the input data must be used for training. The situation with non-mirrored signs is identical to the WLASL's, so applying the horizontal flip to videos is analyzed below.
- • Slovo is the largest, most diversified, and the only publicly available Russian Sign Language (RSL) dataset. The dataset contains 20,400 HD and FHD untrimmed videos performed by 194 signers. It is divided into 1,001 classes, including the additional "no event" class, which indicates videos where the signer is not performing a sign. The Slovo was produced by crowdsourcing platforms, providing lifelike backgrounds and lighting conditions. RSL also contains non-invariant signs to horizontal flip.

### 4.1 SlovoExt Dataset

We expand the Slovo dataset with a self-assembled 30,600 videos. The combination is called SlovoExt and comprises 51,000 samples divided into the same 1,001 classes as Slovo (see Table [1](#S4.T1) ). The process of SlovoExt creation is constructed similarly to maintain the Slovo distribution characteristics such as video length, signer's appearance, and context heterogeneity identical (see Appendix [B](#A2) ). SlovoExt is also utilized to evaluate the proposed training strategies.

The dataset was created exclusively by native speakers of RSL and interpreters proficient in RSL. We involved diverse contributors in the data collection process to address concerns about potential differences in sign presentation between deaf and hard of hearing people. This approach aims to help neural networks manage gesture variability and mitigate the effects of native sign bias [ [11](#bib.bib11) ] .

In collecting the dataset, we carefully considered the specific features of RSL, ensuring that all data was recorded in a single dialect. The dataset was compiled using pre-recorded video templates provided by the All-Russian Society of the Deaf. An exam consisting of 20 questions assessed RSL proficiency for participation in dataset recording. Experts who scored at least 90% were allowed to take on the tasks.

## 5 Experiments

We assess the effectiveness of the training pipeline by comparing two metrics: utilizing (1) the basic approach 4 4 4 The basic approach is the same as the proposed pipeline, but without video and image augmentations, regression head, and classification loss balancing. and (2) proposed strategies. We fine-tune three architectures: two transformers (MViTv2-S with different pre-training and MViTv2-B [ [26](#bib.bib26) ] ) and one CNN (I3D [ [5](#bib.bib5) ] with a ResNet-50 backbone) - on four ISLR datasets. The experiment results are provided in Table [2](#S4.T2) .

The top-1 accuracy is the primary metric for evaluation, measuring the percentage of videos where the predicted class matches the correct class. This metric was chosen due to its widespread use in the SLR task, facilitating comparison with other models and benchmarking. Mean accuracy was used to demonstrate state-of-the-art result on the Slovo dataset and ensure consistency with the metric on the leaderboard 5 5 5 https://paperswithcode.com/sota/sign-language-recognition-on-slovo-russian .

### 5.1 Preprocessing

Input videos are resized to 300 resolution and converted to HDF5 video format. During the training stage, videos are square-padded and randomly cropped to achieve a resolution of 224 × 224. The videos' low side is resized to 224 and square-padded during the validation and testing stages. The model input is a sequence of 32 frames sampled with a step of 2. If the video does not have enough frames for sampling, the last frame is repeated to form a complete clip. The Slovo and the SlovoExt combination are subjected to excluding non-mirrored signs from horizontal flip transformation being applied to them. The WLASL signs are not being flipped, and the AUTSL signs are flipped with no exceptions because Section [6](#S6) shows the efficacy of such decisions.

### 5.2 Training Strategies Application

As shown in Figure [2](#S1.F2) , the preprocessed video is initially exposed to video augmentations. One randomly selected from four modifications ("speed up", "slow down", "random add", and "random drop") is applied to each batch. In contrast, "random boundary shift" is constantly affected. In experiments, "speed up" increases the video speed by 2 times, and "slow down" decreases it by 2 times. "Random drop" shortens video by 10%, while "random add" lengthen it by 30%. The random values for sign boundaries shifting are from the interval [-5, 5], except the interval [-5, 0] for the WLASL and AUTSL datasets due to their trimming by the sign boundaries.

Image augmentations modify the video batch by randomly choosing a combination of them with expertly selected probabilities and magnitudes (see Table [6](#A1.T6) in Appendix). We employ Downscale and Image Compression realizations from the Albumentations [ [3](#bib.bib3) ] computer vision tool and Random Noise, Sharpness, Horizontal Flip, and Color Jitter from the MMAction2 [ [8](#bib.bib8) ] open-source toolbox for video understanding. Note that CutMix [ [41](#bib.bib41) ] and MixUp [ [43](#bib.bib43) ] influence only transformer models in our experiments because they can degrade CNNs due to a lack of correlation between neighboring pixels [ [2](#bib.bib2) ] .

We incorporate IoU scores into the classification head, multiplying classification scores by them. The additional regression head is fed with video features and sign boundaries. The network is trained by optimization IoU-balanced CE and Huber losses for classification and regression heads, respectively. Both are not applied to "no event" videos in the Slovo and the SlovoExt datasets by assigning an IoU score of one and sign boundaries of zeros. Although sign boundaries trim the WLASL and AUTSL datasets, the regression head works appropriately with them.

### 5.3 Training Details

Training is performed until convergence on four Tesla H100s with 80GB RAM. Early stopping is triggered if the top-1 accuracy metric does not increase by at least 0.003 after 7 epochs. For the first 20 epochs, the learning rate is modified by a linear scheduler, and a cosine scheduler is used from epochs 20 to 100. Cross-entropy loss is minimized using the AdamW optimizer. Other parameters are variable and described in Table [7](#A1.T7) .

### 5.4 Results

As Table [2](#S4.T2) shows, the proposed pipeline consistently improves top-1 accuracy across different datasets and architectures. The impact is less prominent but still noticeable regarding the model I3D, resulting in an average improvement of 1.72% across datasets.

The developed strategies allow the achievement of state-of-the-art results on the WLASL and Slovo datasets. These metrics are obtained using MViTv2-S pre-trained with MaskFeat. We utilize the additional pretraining on the SlovoExt dataset for WLASL, resulting in a 62.89% top-1 accuracy. The state-of-the-art result on the Slovo is also achieved with K400-MViTv2 initialization, surpassing the current one by 13.06% mean accuracy instead of 14.12% with MaskFeat.

## 6 Ablation Study

This section estimates the impact of each part of the proposed pipeline individually. We divide all modifications into three blocks: (1) image augmentations, (2) video augmentations, and (3) additional losses. We test the necessity for each block by disconnecting it from the entire pipeline and for its parts by shutting down only a particular change and fixing everything else. The ablation study uses MViTv2-S pre-trained on the MaskFeat to train on the SlovoExt combination.

### 6.1 Image Augmentations Necessity

The image augmentations block is additionally divided into two parts - basic image transformations and CutMix-MixUp pair - to simplify assessing their influence. We shut down each part and a combination of them, resulting in three experiments. The first three rows in Table [3](#S5.T3) illustrate that the metric significantly decreases by 4.06% in the absence of all image augmentations. The influence of basic image augmentation is two times less than the CutMix-MixUp one.

We also evaluate various augmentation-applying approaches, including RandAugment [ [9](#bib.bib9) ] , UniformAugment [ [28](#bib.bib28) ] , and random sequential applications. Table [4](#S5.T4) indicates that RandAugment and UniformAugment approaches are not justified in the proposed pipeline.

Additionally, since we are uncertain which signs are non-mirrored in WLASL and AUTSL datasets, we search for the optimal option via two experiments for each: one with flip augmentation and one without for all signs. On WLASL, the metric with a flip is lower by 1.3%, indicating that this dataset probably contains numerous non-mirrored signs. On AUTSL, conversely, the metric with flip was higher by 0.11%. Therefore, in the main experiments, we apply flip augmentation to the AUTSL dataset and refrain from using it with the WLASL dataset.

### 6.2 Video Augmentations Necessity

Similar to the above subsection, we split the estimation of video augmentations necessity by disconnecting each of them separately and the whole block, providing six experiments. The most notable impact achievable with one modification is produced by "slow down" augmentation, as without it, the top-1 accuracy drops by 0.66%.

### 6.3 Additional Losses Necessity

The process of evaluation is constructed identically. The last three rows in Table [3](#S5.T3) show that the regression loss provides a more substantial improvement than the IoU-balanced CE loss, resulting in a 0.52% increase in metrics compared to 0.05% increase. The result suggests that information about absolute sign boundaries is more crucial than relative sign position within the sampling window.

Also, we conduct additional research on the impact of Huber regression loss by replacing it with MAE and MSE losses (see Table [5](#S5.T5) ). We observe lower metrics in both cases, with MAE yielding the lowest at 86.68%. These results could be attributed to the behavior of MAE, which, while descending rapidly, may get stuck on values close to the ground truth, overshooting the desired target value.

## 7 Discussion

Ethical Considerations. All participants signed consent forms before data mining. The forms authorized the processing and publication of personal data for research purposes. We do not restrict videos with signers under 18 since parental permission was obtained during the registration, which complies with the Civil Code of the Russian Federation 6 6 6 https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/en/national-practice/federal-law-no-152-fz-personal-data-2006 . To preserve contributors' privacy, we employ anonymized user hash IDs in the dataset annotations. Furthermore, we have ensured that the Slovo dataset meets these ethical criteria. We provide the dataset for research purposes only, but we understand that it could be misused for malicious purposes, such as identifying people or large-scale surveillance.

Positional Statement. Through the research of the ISLR task, we involved the All-Russian Community of Deaf experts and professional sign language interpreters. The expertise of the All-Russian Society of the Deaf 7 7 7 https://voginfo.ru/all-russian-society-of-the-deaf/ was utilized at every stage of the SlovoExt dataset creation, including data collection, validation, and verification processes, as well as video tagging. We also involved deaf consultants in developing training strategies to apply Considerations to particular solutions. Additionally, some of our researchers took formal courses on RSL to enhance their knowledge of this domain.

Limitations. Since the failure case of CNNs metrics degradation in Table [2](#S4.T2) because of CutMix and MixUp, such augmentations must be excluded from the proposed pipeline while learning CNNs. Besides, the regression head and IoU-balanced CE loss require sign boundary annotations that are frequently difficult to achieve. In another situation, the dataset may be trimmed by sign boundaries. Thus, "random boundary shift" augmentation can shift the sign boundaries only inward to the center instead of the entire application with a shift to both sides. We processed RGB frames and did not analyze articulation, keypoints, and depth information. The lack of awareness about non-mirrored signs in sign language can be problematic for researchers with flip augmentation. There are other hardships in each sign language, and each has its specifics that are important to consider when adapting the pipeline.

## 8 Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce a training pipeline for the ISLR models, considering the specifics of the SLR domain and the constraints of real-world usage. We prove the effectiveness of applying image and video augmentations to address the issues of low data quality and varying gesturing speed. The importance of integrating temporal information into the model by the regression head combined with IoU-balanced CE loss is also presented. The developed pipeline delivers state-of-the-art results on the WLASL and Slovo datasets. Future work will extend the training strategies to CSLR and SLT tasks.

## Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Alena Fenogenova, Albina Akhmetgareeva and Anastasia Vasyatkina for the discussions and comments on this work.

## References

- [1] Junseok Ahn, Youngjoon Jang, and Joon Son Chung. [Slowfast Network for Continuous Sign Language Recognition](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/10445841/) . pages 3920-3924, 2024.
- [2] Sihun Baek, Jihong Park, Praneeth Vepakomma, Ramesh Raskar, Mehdi Bennis, and Seong-Lyun Kim. [Visual transformer meets cutmix for improved accuracy, communication efficiency, and data privacy in split learning](https://federated-learning.org/fl-ijcai-2022/Papers/FL-IJCAI-22_paper_27.pdf) . arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00234 , 2022.
- [3] Alexander Buslaev, Vladimir I Iglovikov, Eugene Khvedchenya, Alex Parinov, Mikhail Druzhinin, and Alexandr A Kalinin. [Albumentations: fast and flexible image augmentations](https://www.mdpi.com/2078-2489/11/2/125?ref=https://githubhelp.com) . Information , 11(2):125, 2020.
- [4] Necati Cihan Camgoz, Oscar Koller, Simon Hadfield, and Richard Bowden. [Multi-channel transformers for multi-articulatory sign language translation](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-66823-5_18) , 2020.
- [5] Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. [Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics dataset](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2017/html/Carreira_Quo_Vadis_Action_CVPR_2017_paper.html) , 2017.
- [6] Yutong Chen, Fangyun Wei, Xiao Sun, Zhirong Wu, and Stephen Lin. [A simple multi-modality transfer learning baseline for sign language translation](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2022/html/Chen_A_Simple_Multi-Modality_Transfer_Learning_Baseline_for_Sign_Language_Translation_CVPR_2022_paper.html) , 2022.
- [7] Yutong Chen, Ronglai Zuo, Fangyun Wei, Yu Wu, Shujie Liu, and Brian Mak. [Two-stream network for sign language recognition and translation](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/6cd3ac24cdb789beeaa9f7145670fcae-Abstract-Conference.html) , 2022.
- [8] MMAction Contributors. [Openmmlab's next generation video understanding toolbox and benchmark](https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmaction2) , 2020.
- [9] Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. [Randaugment: Practical automated data augmentation with a reduced search space](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPRW_2020/html/w40/Cubuk_Randaugment_Practical_Automated_Data_Augmentation_With_a_Reduced_Search_Space_CVPRW_2020_paper.html) , 2020.
- [10] Aakash Deep, Aashutosh Litoriya, Akshay Ingole, Vaibhav Asare, Shubham M Bhole, and Shantanu Pathak. [Realtime sign language detection and recognition](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9908995/) . In 2022 2nd Asian Conference on Innovation in Technology (ASIANCON) , pages 1-4. IEEE, 2022.
- [11] Aashaka Desai, Maartje De Meulder, Julie A Hochgesang, Annemarie Kocab, and Alex X Lu. [Systemic Biases in Sign Language AI Research: A Deaf-Led Call to Reevaluate Research Agendas](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.02563) , 2024.
- [12] Artjoms Gorpincenko and Michal Mackiewicz. [Extending Temporal Data Augmentation for Video Action Recognition](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-25825-1_8) , 2022.
- [13] Eva Gutierrez-Sigut, Brendan Costello, Cristina Baus, and Manuel Carreiras. [LSE-sign: A lexical database for spanish sign language](https://link.springer.com/article/10.3758/s13428-014-0560-1) . Behavior Research Methods , 48:123-137, 2016.
- [14] Aiming Hao, Yuecong Min, and Xilin Chen. [Self-mutual distillation learning for continuous sign language recognition](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2021/html/Hao_Self-Mutual_Distillation_Learning_for_Continuous_Sign_Language_Recognition_ICCV_2021_paper.html) . In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 11303-11312, 2021.
- [15] Lianyu Hu, Liqing Gao, Zekang Liu, and Wei Feng. [Continuous sign language recognition with correlation network](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2023/html/Hu_Continuous_Sign_Language_Recognition_With_Correlation_Network_CVPR_2023_paper.html) , 2023.
- [16] Peter J Huber. [Robust estimation of a location parameter](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4612-4380-9_35) . pages 492-518, 1992.
- [17] Alfarabi Imashev, Medet Mukushev, Vadim Kimmelman, and Anara Sandygulova. [A dataset for linguistic understanding, visual evaluation, and recognition of sign languages: The k-rsl](https://aclanthology.org/2020.conll-1.51/) , 2020.
- [18] Vaishnavi Jadhav, Priyal Agarwal, Dhruvisha Mondhe, Rutuja Patil, and CS Lifna. [A Survey of Sign Language Recognition Systems](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Vaishnavi-Jadhav-12/publication/366327889_A_Survey_of_Sign_Language_Recognition_Systems/links/63a47330097c7832ca5906a7/A-Survey-of-Sign-Language-Recognition-Systems.pdf?origin=journalDetail&_tp=eyJwYWdlIjoiam91cm5hbERldGFpbCJ9) , 2022.
- [19] Sanyam Jain. [ADDSL: hand gesture detection and sign language recognition on annotated danish sign language](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.09736) , 2023.
- [20] Hamid Reza Vaezi Joze and Oscar Koller. [Ms-asl: A large-scale data set and benchmark for understanding american sign language](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01053) , 2018.
- [21] Ildar Kagirov, Denis Ivanko, Dmitry Ryumin, Alexander Axyonov, and Alexey Karpov. [TheRuSLan: Database of Russian sign language](https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.746/) , 2020.
- [22] Jichao Kan, Kun Hu, Markus Hagenbuchner, Ah Chung Tsoi, Mohammed Bennamoun, and Zhiyong Wang. [Sign language translation with hierarchical spatio-temporal graph neural network](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/WACV2022/html/Kan_Sign_Language_Translation_With_Hierarchical_Spatio-Temporal_Graph_Neural_Network_WACV_2022_paper.html) , 2022.
- [23] Alexander Kapitanov, Kvanchiani Karina, Alexander Nagaev, and Petrova Elizaveta. [Slovo: Russian Sign Language Dataset](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-44137-0_6) , pages 63-73. 2023.
- [24] Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang, Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijayanarasimhan, Fabio Viola, Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, et al. [The kinetics human action video dataset](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.06950) , 2017.
- [25] Dongxu Li, Cristian Rodriguez, Xin Yu, and Hongdong Li. [Word-level deep sign language recognition from video: A new large-scale dataset and methods comparison](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_WACV_2020/html/Li_Word-level_Deep_Sign_Language_Recognition_from_Video_A_New_Large-scale_WACV_2020_paper.html) , 2020.
- [26] Yanghao Li, Chao-Yuan Wu, Haoqi Fan, Karttikeya Mangalam, Bo Xiong, Jitendra Malik, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. [Mvitv2: Improved multiscale vision transformers for classification and detection](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2022/html/Li_MViTv2_Improved_Multiscale_Vision_Transformers_for_Classification_and_Detection_CVPR_2022_paper.html) , 2022.
- [27] Lukas Liebel and Marco Körner. [Auxiliary tasks in multi-task learning](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.06334) , 2018.
- [28] Tom Ching LingChen, Ava Khonsari, Amirreza Lashkari, Mina Rafi Nazari, Jaspreet Singh Sambee, and Mario A Nascimento. [Uniformaugment: A search-free probabilistic data augmentation approach](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.14348) , 2020.
- [29] Xiaolong Liu, Qimeng Wang, Yao Hu, Xu Tang, Shiwei Zhang, Song Bai, and Xiang Bai. [End-to-end temporal action detection with transformer](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9854104/) . IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , 31:5427-5441, 2022.
- [30] Lu Meng and Ronghui Li. [An attention-enhanced multi-scale and dual sign language recognition network based on a graph convolution network](https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/21/4/1120) , 2021.
- [31] Yuecong Min, Aiming Hao, Xiujuan Chai, and Xilin Chen. [Visual alignment constraint for continuous sign language recognition](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2021/html/Min_Visual_Alignment_Constraint_for_Continuous_Sign_Language_Recognition_ICCV_2021_paper.html?ref=https://githubhelp.com) , 2021.
- [32] Medet Mukushev, Aidyn Ubingazhibov, Aigerim Kydyrbekova, Alfarabi Imashev, Vadim Kimmelman, and Anara Sandygulova. [FluentSigners-50: A signer independent benchmark dataset for sign language processing](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0273649) , 2022.
- [33] KR Prajwal, Hannah Bull, Liliane Momeni, Samuel Albanie, Gül Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. [Weakly-supervised fingerspelling recognition in british sign language videos](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.08954) , 2022.
- [34] Alexey Prikhodko, Mikhail Grif, and Maxim Bakaev. [Sign language recognition based on notations and neural networks](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-65218-0_34) , 2020.
- [35] Junfu Pu, Wengang Zhou, Hezhen Hu, and Houqiang Li. [Boosting continuous sign language recognition via cross modality augmentation](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3394171.3413931) . In Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia , pages 1497-1505, 2020.
- [36] Franco Ronchetti, Facundo Manuel Quiroga, César Estrebou, Laura Lanzarini, and Alejandro Rosete. [LSA64: an Argentinian sign language dataset](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17429) , 2023.
- [37] Ozge Mercanoglu Sincan and Hacer Yalim Keles. [Autsl: A large scale multi-modal turkish sign language dataset and baseline methods](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9210578/) . IEEE access , 8:181340-181355, 2020.
- [38] Chen Wei, Haoqi Fan, Saining Xie, Chao-Yuan Wu, Alan Yuille, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. [Masked feature prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2022/html/Wei_Masked_Feature_Prediction_for_Self-Supervised_Visual_Pre-Training_CVPR_2022_paper.html) , 2022.
- [39] Shengkai Wu, Jinrong Yang, Xinggang Wang, and Xiaoping Li. [Iou-balanced loss functions for single-stage object detection](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167865522000289) , 2022.
- [40] Wanru Xu, Zhenjiang Miao, Jian Yu, and Qiang Ji. [Action recognition and localization with spatial and temporal contexts](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231219300189) . Neurocomputing , 333:351-363, 2019.
- [41] Sangdoo Yun, Dongyoon Han, Seong Joon Oh, Sanghyuk Chun, Junsuk Choe, and Youngjoon Yoo. [CutMix: Regularization Strategy to Train Strong Classifiers with Localizable Features](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_ICCV_2019/html/Yun_CutMix_Regularization_Strategy_to_Train_Strong_Classifiers_With_Localizable_Features_ICCV_2019_paper.html) , 2019.
- [42] Chen-Lin Zhang, Jianxin Wu, and Yin Li. [Actionformer: Localizing moments of actions with transformers](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-19772-7_29) , 2022.
- [43] Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. [mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.09412) , 2017.
- [44] Benjia Zhou, Zhigang Chen, Albert Clapés, Jun Wan, Yanyan Liang, Sergio Escalera, Zhen Lei, and Du Zhang. [Gloss-free sign language translation: Improving from visual-language pretraining](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2023/html/Zhou_Gloss-Free_Sign_Language_Translation_Improving_from_Visual-Language_Pretraining_ICCV_2023_paper.html) , 2023.
- [45] Hao Zhou, Wengang Zhou, Yun Zhou, and Houqiang Li. [Spatial-temporal multi-cue network for continuous sign language recognition](https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/7001) , 2020.
- [46] Zixin Zhu, Le Wang, Wei Tang, Ziyi Liu, Nanning Zheng, and Gang Hua. [Learning disentangled classification and localization representations for temporal action localization](https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/20277) . 36(3):3644-3652, 2022.
- [47] Ronglai Zuo and Brian Mak. [Improving continuous sign language recognition with consistency constraints and signer removal](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3640815) , 2024.
- [48] Ronglai Zuo, Fangyun Wei, and Brian Mak. [Natural language-assisted sign language recognition](http://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2023/html/Zuo_Natural_Language-Assisted_Sign_Language_Recognition_CVPR_2023_paper.html) , 2023.

## Supplementary materials

## Appendix A The Variable Parameters.

## Appendix B SlovoExt Creation Pipeline

We collected the self-assembled part of the SlovoExt dataset in three main stages: (1) data mining, (2) validation, and (3) annotation. Tasks were available only to those who passed the mandatory Russian Sign Language (RSL) exam and could thus be considered native speakers. We utilized Yandex Toloka 8 8 8 https://platform.toloka.ai/ for the first stage and ABC Elementary 9 9 9 https://elementary.activebc.ru for the others due to the specifics of each of the platforms and to avoid checking signers own videos. The creation pipeline of the self-assembled Russian Isolated Sign Language Dataset is briefly described below.

1. 1. Mining. The sign basket was the same as in the Slovo dataset [ [23](#bib.bib23) ] : 1,000 frequently used words with a video template from the SpreadTheSign website 10 10 10 https://www.spreadthesign.com/ru.ru/search/ were collected. The signers were informed about further publication of submitted videos.
2. 2. Validation. The recorded videos were strictly validated, excluding videos performed incorrectly and low-resolution videos. At least three crowdworkers confirmed the correctness of each video.
3. 3. Annotation. Crowdworkers indicated the start and end frames of the sign on each video to train the model to locate it. Three different crowdworkers were assigned to annotate each video, and their annotations were averaged to create a high-confidence, accurate annotation.

Then, we expand the Slovo with a self-assembled dataset and split the result SlovoExt into train (75%) and test (25%) subsets, ensuring minimal user overlap between them.

## Appendix C Dataset Licenses

The WLASL [ [25](#bib.bib25) ] dataset is distributed under the Computational Use of Data Agreement (C-UDA) 11 11 11 https://github.com/microsoft/Computational-Use-of-Data-Agreement , restricting its usage exclusively to academic and computational purposes. Redistribution of the data is allowed if credit or attribution information is included. The AUTSL [ [37](#bib.bib37) ] dataset, as stated at the project site 12 12 12 https://cvml.ankara.edu.tr/datasets/ , was developed and made available exclusively for academic and research purposes. The Slovo [ [23](#bib.bib23) ] dataset is licensed under a variant of Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License 13 13 13 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/deed.en . Anyone can share and adapt this data for any purpose, even commercially.

## References

- [[b09889c1455b1e255811037cd9199edfd92be006]] — Systemic Biases in Sign Language AI Research: A Deaf-Led Call to Reevaluate Research Agendas (2024)
- [[f3c7313e929998845885a5512dc095929a847ba1]] — LSA64: An Argentinian Sign Language Dataset (2023)
- [[a6d677eb70cc5d9e621a8040a6254ecf68dd7c9a]] — Gloss-free Sign Language Translation: Improving from Visual-Language Pretraining (2023)
- [[c40fb5b510869abd50370bf891bdebda526c0261]] — Slovo: Russian Sign Language Dataset (2023)
- [[b8ea0f10ae03ec482b478425fff467383ba84279]] — ADDSL: Hand Gesture Detection and Sign Language Recognition on Annotated Danish Sign Language (2023)
- [[6648bbbb7ad41397d315d1c83ac02a39ac875b19]] — Natural Language-Assisted Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[d9c38e7957c10252cc0e66b20c55d5be615db10d]] — Continuous Sign Language Recognition with Correlation Network (2023)
- [[8cac1a726a7fa1160ce86733e66ebba6c78b71eb]] — Improving Continuous Sign Language Recognition with Consistency Constraints and Signer Removal (2022)
- [[37d445fc4bd873541e7d086968372e4516bbece0]] — Weakly-supervised Fingerspelling Recognition in British Sign Language Videos (2022)
- [[5c6218de68ce145e2b89e663cca9acbfd79d1d3e]] — Extending Temporal Data Augmentation for Video Action Recognition (2022)
- [[78bc5b0a9fa28ccf2a580f36783e310d436a7874]] — Two-Stream Network for Sign Language Recognition and Translation (2022)
- [[1c5a9035242c3341b86a77f96291ee87e8363bed]] — FluentSigners-50: A signer independent benchmark dataset for sign language processing (2022)
- [[2a29c14ea9470ad7fdbb977b16ed34f4bba8c3f9]] — Visual Transformer Meets CutMix for Improved Accuracy, Communication Efficiency, and Data Privacy in Split Learning (2022)
- [[dd1e216fe9cf4aeda25c85772c4de2967c69f94f]] — Learning Disentangled Classification and Localization Representations for Temporal Action Localization (2022)
- [[33703b1bfecb918aea4dcc2644a759f1de37c940]] — A Simple Multi-Modality Transfer Learning Baseline for Sign Language Translation (2022)
- [[58a3fedc03ab9f5908c077c115eff4c8d2d87660]] — ActionFormer: Localizing Moments of Actions with Transformers (2022)
- [[008a428e049003fe768068a0f1fa1416af5c4982]] — Masked Feature Prediction for Self-Supervised Visual Pre-Training (2021)
- [[9137efc758f80dd22bb56f82cca5c94f78a5db3e]] — MViTv2: Improved Multiscale Vision Transformers for Classification and Detection (2021)
- [[90a8032116a100e483e3a99db76d2fe22c31ee14]] — Sign Language Translation with Hierarchical Spatio-Temporal Graph Neural Network (2021)
- [[609d68085efa9b1da1068639e4850252cc0cf6ae]] — Self-Mutual Distillation Learning for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[2f5f8e60a1c8cea0a0ba669305f0020854549ddd]] — End-to-End Temporal Action Detection With Transformer (2021)
- [[2d2d5bb1d025c5e17abe13716599c93e1f131927]] — Visual Alignment Constraint for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[76daec3448e1ef066b69ddc9b4e88fcc23026873]] — An Attention-Enhanced Multi-Scale and Dual Sign Language Recognition Network Based on a Graph Convolution Network (2021)
- [[9a7d07bb7d86ed0fd4825ea97ad18f7ba3bc7a60]] — A Dataset for Linguistic Understanding, Visual Evaluation, and Recognition of Sign Languages: The K-RSL (2020)
- [[ce50fa888551b640fe3dddc57289c27f325c029b]] — Boosting Continuous Sign Language Recognition via Cross Modality Augmentation (2020)
- [[4fe56f5f7a7196571e81ec243d86df376269695c]] — Multi-channel Transformers for Multi-articulatory Sign Language Translation (2020)
- [[14cc503211af3ba271e0ebee622e0439c693793f]] — AUTSL: A Large Scale Multi-Modal Turkish Sign Language Dataset and Baseline Methods (2020)
- [[be26be1699ba59f2f00989dec3c6a58d0d1d0465]] — TheRuSLan: Database of Russian Sign Language (2020)
- [[cdfbd6449d4b39b5c7eb73c7bad9487d394bdf22]] — UniformAugment: A Search-free Probabilistic Data Augmentation Approach (2020)
- [[a1e2665ac39dcb389e12f3f993004b4b4651826d]] — Spatial-Temporal Multi-Cue Network for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2020)
- [[874063b6c71aef8382eb66a66d8a1c1188e78a9a]] — Word-level Deep Sign Language Recognition from Video: A New Large-scale Dataset and Methods Comparison (2019)
- [[87f6a7c014ce206ac5b57299c07e10667d194b39]] — Randaugment: Practical automated data augmentation with a reduced search space (2019)
- [[a075b4f1e78902d4651be154e395b4694e49bb9a]] — IoU-balanced Loss Functions for Single-stage Object Detection (2019)
- [[ed17929e66da7f8fbc3666bf5eb613d302ddde0c]] — CutMix: Regularization Strategy to Train Strong Classifiers With Localizable Features (2019)
- [[f38d00417e5e6655caf8eeea224aaceffbe20606]] — Action recognition and localization with spatial and temporal contexts (2019)
- [[310a8e2c9f2650fa2e44fdf0d82d11c0cb3e387e]] — MS-ASL: A Large-Scale Data Set and Benchmark for Understanding American Sign Language (2018)
- [[17555c227941654bc19d613742e2508f209c6d86]] — Albumentations: fast and flexible image augmentations (2018)
- [[11943efec248fcac57ff6913424e230d0a02e977]] — Auxiliary Tasks in Multi-task Learning (2018)
- [[4feef0fd284feb1233399b400eb897f59ec92755]] — mixup: Beyond Empirical Risk Minimization (2017)
- [[b61a3f8b80bbd44f24544dc915f52fd30bbdf485]] — Quo Vadis, Action Recognition? A New Model and the Kinetics Dataset (2017)
- [[86e1bdbfd13b9ed137e4c4b8b459a3980eb257f6]] — The Kinetics Human Action Video Dataset (2017)
- [[71b673988e4990b535a3a7a6b9a2f184891c257d]] — LSE-Sign: A lexical database for Spanish Sign Language (2015)
- [[f669ae1329ff69af5181b555940b9b4c52c3ed8f]] — A Survey on Sign Language Recognition Systems (2021)
- [[813cb3ccea9819d6b6624c133588e8a74a471c70]] — Sign Language Recognition Based on Notations and Neural Networks (2020)
- MMAction Contributors (2020)
- Decoupled Weight De-cay Regularization (2019)
- [[c87d57da3b1f2b467ef4995d30df832ee2281107]] — On robust estimation of the location parameter (1980)
- Localizing moments of ()

## Cited by

- [[63eea5048d8a6f1f2163f07e5bd8f3e950a0a08f]] — Logos as a Well-Tempered Pre-train for Sign Language Recognition (2025)

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: ar5iv
- bibtex: semanticscholar
