---
semanticScholarId: "c6850869aa5e78a107c378d2e8bfa39633158c0c"
bibKey: null
year: 2016
title: "Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation"
doi: null
arxivId: "1609.08144"
isSignLanguage: false
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation

**Year:** [[2016]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Yonghui Wu; M. Schuster; Z. Chen; Quoc V. Le; Mohammad Norouzi; Wolfgang Macherey; M. Krikun; Yuan Cao; Qin Gao; Klaus Macherey; J. Klingner; Apurva Shah; Melvin Johnson; Xiaobing Liu; Lukasz Kaiser; Stephan Gouws; Yoshikiyo Kato; Taku Kudo; H. Kazawa; K. Stevens; George Kurian; Nishant Patil; Wei Wang; C. Young; Jason R. Smith; Jason Riesa; Alex Rudnick; O. Vinyals; G. Corrado; Macduff Hughes; J. Dean

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c6850869aa5e78a107c378d2e8bfa39633158c0c)
- [arXiv:1609.08144](https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08144)

## Abstract

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) is an end-to-end learning approach for automated translation, with the potential to overcome many of the weaknesses of conventional phrase-based translation systems. Unfortunately, NMT systems are known to be computationally expensive both in training and in translation inference. Also, most NMT systems have difficulty with rare words. These issues have hindered NMT's use in practical deployments and services, where both accuracy and speed are essential. In this work, we present GNMT, Google's Neural Machine Translation system, which attempts to address many of these issues. Our model consists of a deep LSTM network with 8 encoder and 8 decoder layers using attention and residual connections. To improve parallelism and therefore decrease training time, our attention mechanism connects the bottom layer of the decoder to the top layer of the encoder. To accelerate the final translation speed, we employ low-precision arithmetic during inference computations. To improve handling of rare words, we divide words into a limited set of common sub-word units ("wordpieces") for both input and output. This method provides a good balance between the flexibility of "character"-delimited models and the efficiency of "word"-delimited models, naturally handles translation of rare words, and ultimately improves the overall accuracy of the system. Our beam search technique employs a length-normalization procedure and uses a coverage penalty, which encourages generation of an output sentence that is most likely to cover all the words in the source sentence. On the WMT'14 English-to-French and English-to-German benchmarks, GNMT achieves competitive results to state-of-the-art. Using a human side-by-side evaluation on a set of isolated simple sentences, it reduces translation errors by an average of 60% compared to Google's phrase-based production system.

## TL;DR

GNMT, Google's Neural Machine Translation system, is presented, which attempts to address many of the weaknesses of conventional phrase-based translation systems and provides a good balance between the flexibility of "character"-delimited models and the efficiency of "word"-delicited models.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Wu2016GooglesNM,
 author = {Yonghui Wu and M. Schuster and Z. Chen and Quoc V. Le and Mohammad Norouzi and Wolfgang Macherey and M. Krikun and Yuan Cao and Qin Gao and Klaus Macherey and J. Klingner and Apurva Shah and Melvin Johnson and Xiaobing Liu and Lukasz Kaiser and Stephan Gouws and Yoshikiyo Kato and Taku Kudo and H. Kazawa and K. Stevens and George Kurian and Nishant Patil and Wei Wang and C. Young and Jason R. Smith and Jason Riesa and Alex Rudnick and O. Vinyals and G. Corrado and Macduff Hughes and J. Dean},
 booktitle = {arXiv.org},
 journal = {ArXiv},
 title = {Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and Machine Translation},
 volume = {abs/1609.08144},
 year = {2016}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: semanticscholar
