---
semanticScholarId: "d97d2fe18aa00be936fa8492a0c394f3b6791ed4"
bibKey: "dataset:ozdemir2020bosphorussign22k"
year: 2020
title: "BosphorusSign22k Sign Language Recognition Dataset"
doi: null
arxivId: "2004.01283"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Computer Science", "Linguistics"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "ar5iv"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: ar5iv
  bibtex: ours
---

# BosphorusSign22k Sign Language Recognition Dataset

**Year:** [[2020]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/linguistics|Linguistics]]
**Authors:** Ogulcan Özdemir; A. Kındıroglu; Necati Cihan Camgöz; L. Akarun

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d97d2fe18aa00be936fa8492a0c394f3b6791ed4)
- [arXiv:2004.01283](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.01283)
- [ACL Anthology](https://aclanthology.org/2020.signlang-1.30)

## Abstract

Sign Language Recognition is a challenging research domain. It has recently seen several advancements with the increased availability of data. In this paper, we introduce the BosphorusSign22k, a publicly available large scale sign language dataset aimed at computer vision, video recognition and deep learning research communities. The primary objective of this dataset is to serve as a new benchmark in Turkish Sign Language Recognition for its vast lexicon, the high number of repetitions by native signers, high recording quality, and the unique syntactic properties of the signs it encompasses. We also provide state-of-the-art human pose estimates to encourage other tasks such as Sign Language Production. We survey other publicly available datasets and expand on how BosphorusSign22k can contribute to future research that is being made possible through the widespread availability of similar Sign Language resources. We have conducted extensive experiments and present baseline results to underpin future research on our dataset.

## TL;DR

The primary objective of this dataset is to serve as a new benchmark in Turkish Sign Language Recognition for its vast lexicon, the high number of repetitions by native signers, high recording quality, and the unique syntactic properties of the signs it encompasses.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@inproceedings{dataset:ozdemir2020bosphorussign22k,
 address = {Marseille, France},
 author = {{\"O}zdemir, O{\u{g}}ulcan  and
K{\i}nd{\i}ro{\u{g}}lu, Ahmet Alp  and
Cihan Camg{\"o}z, Necati  and
Akarun, Lale},
 booktitle = {Proceedings of the LREC2020 9th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Sign Language Resources in the Service of the Language Community, Technological Challenges and Application Perspectives},
 editor = {Efthimiou, Eleni  and
Fotinea, Stavroula-Evita  and
Hanke, Thomas  and
Hochgesang, Julie A.  and
Kristoffersen, Jette  and
Mesch, Johanna},
 isbn = {979-10-95546-54-2},
 language = {English},
 pages = {181--188},
 publisher = {European Language Resources Association (ELRA)},
 title = {{B}osphorus{S}ign22k Sign Language Recognition Dataset},
 url = {https://aclanthology.org/2020.signlang-1.30},
 year = {2020}
}
```

## Full Text

# BosphorusSign22k Sign Language Recognition Dataset

###### Abstract

Sign Language Recognition is a challenging research domain. It has recently seen several advancements with the increased availability of data. In this paper, we introduce the BosphorusSign 22k , a publicly available large scale sign language dataset aimed at computer vision, video recognition and deep learning research communities. The primary objective of this dataset is to serve as a new benchmark in Turkish Sign Language Recognition for its vast lexicon, the high number of repetitions by native signers, high recording quality, and the unique syntactic properties of the signs it encompasses. We also provide state-of-the-art human pose estimates to encourage other tasks such as Sign Language Production. We survey other publicly available datasets and expand on how BosphorusSign 22k can contribute to future research that is being made possible through the widespread availability of similar Sign Language resources. We have conducted extensive experiments and present baseline results to underpin future research on our dataset. Keywords: Turkish Sign Language (TID), Sign Language Recognition, Deep Learning

\newcites

languageresourceLanguage Resources

SLRT

Sign Language Recognition Transformer

SLTT

Sign Language Translation Transformer

ASLR

Automatic Sign Language Recognition

BSL

British Sign Language

BLEU

Bilingual Evaluation Understudy

BLSTM

Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory

CNN

Convolutional Neural Network

CRF

Conditional Random Field

CSLR

Continuous Sign Language Recognition

CTC

Connectionist Temporal Classification

DL

Deep Learning

DGS

German Sign Language - Deutsche Gebärdensprache

DSGS

Swiss German Sign Language - Deutschschweizer Gebärdensprache

FC

Fully Connected

FV

Fisher Vector

GAN

Generative Adversarial Network

GPU

Graphics Processing Unit

GRU

Gated Recurrent Unit

GMM

Gaussian Mixture Model

HMM

Hidden Markov Model

HOG

Histograms of Oriented Gradients

HOF

Histograms of Optical Flow

IP

Inner Product

ISL

Irish Sign Language

IDT

Improved Dense Trajectory

LCS

Longest Common Subsequence

LSTM

Long Short-Term Memory

MBH

Motion Boundary Histograms

NMT

Neural Machine Translation

OCR

Optical Character Recognition

PHOENIX12

RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather-2012

PHOENIX14

RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather-2014

PHOENIX14 T

RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather-2014 T

PCA

Principal Component Analysis

RELU

Rectified Linear Units

RNN

Recurrent Neural Network

ROUGE

Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation

SGD

Stochastic Gradient Descent

SLA

Sign Language Assessment

SLR

Sign Language Recognition

SLT

Sign Language Translation

SIFT

Scale Invariant Feature Transform

SURF

Speeded Up Robust Features

SVM

Support Vector Machine

WER

Word Error Rate

BosphorusSign22k Sign Language Recognition Dataset

| Oğulcan Özdemir a , Ahmet Alp Kındıroğlu a , Necati Cihan Camgöz b , Lale Akarun a   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| a Boğaziçi University, Computer Engineering Department, Istanbul, Turkey             |
| b CVSSP, University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom                             |
| {ogulcan.ozdemir, alp.kindiroglu, akarun}@boun.edu.tr, n.camgoz@surrey.ac.uk         |

Abstract content

## 1. Introduction

As native languages of the Deaf, Sign Languages (SL) are visio-temporal constructs which convey meaning through hand gestures, upper body motion, facial expressions and mouthings. [Automatic Sign Language Recognition](#id3.3.id3) ( [ASLR](#id3.3.id3) ) is a challenging task and an active research field with the aim of reducing the dependency of sign language interpreters in the daily lives of the Deaf.

Among the many similar problems attempted by deep learning researchers, sign language recognition bears a resemblance to video-based action recognition because of its shared medium of information [ [Varol et al. (2017](#bib.bibx46) ] , and to speech recognition and machine translation problems [ [Bahar et al. (2019](#bib.bibx2) , [Bahdanau et al. (2017](#bib.bibx3) ] , due to its linguistic nature. However, there are certain aspects of [ASLR](#id3.3.id3) that makes the task more challenging, one of which is the asynchronous multi-articulatory nature of the sign [ [Sutton-Spence and Woll (1999](#bib.bibx42) ] . Furthermore, the lack of large databases aimed at computer vision communities and the difficulty of annotating them has been an inhibiting factor in [ASLR](#id3.3.id3) research [ [Hanke et al. (2010](#bib.bibx19) , [Schembri et al. (2013](#bib.bibx36) ] .

In this paper, we present BosphorusSign 22k , an isolated SL dataset, for benchmarking repeatable deep learning experiments on SLR. The dataset was derived from BosphorusSign [ [Camgoz et al. (2016c](#bib.bibx6) ] , which has high-quality recordings collected from Deaf users of Turkish Sign Language (TID). The BosphorusSign Dataset was categorized linguistically, where sign glosses with the same meaning but a different set of morphemes were considered belonging to the same class. Although this annotation scheme was aimed to be useful in a Q&amp;A based interaction system, i.e., banking or hospital desk applications [ [Suzgun et al. (2015](#bib.bibx43) ] , it is not well-suited for sign language recognition and production systems, where distinguishing between instances of similar sign classes with similar manual and non-manual features is essential.

Although, BosphorusSign is publicly available, there are no benchmarks reported on this dataset. Furthermore, BosphorusSign does not have an evaluation protocol, making future research conducted using BosphorusSign dataset incomparable with one another.

Moreover, BosphorusSign dataset only provided skeleton information obtained from the Kinect V2 SDK. Although real-time depth-based skeleton estimation was state-of-the-art at the time of BosphorusSign's creation, it is jittery and lacks the crucial hand pose information, making the skeleton information provided in the BosphorusSign dataset inadequate for training human pose based sign recognition, translation and production models [ [Stoll et al. (2018](#bib.bibx40) , [Stoll et al. (2020](#bib.bibx41) ] .

To address these issues, in this paper, we have enhanced and refined the BosphorusSign dataset, to help future research in the fields of sign language recognition and production. The contributions of this work are listed as;

- • We have visually reviewed and cleaned up the dataset and removed all erroneous sign performances.
- • We have revisited the labeling scheme and converted the linguistic categorization into a form more suitable for recognition and production research where each class shares the same manual features.
- • We provide OpenPose [ [Cao et al. (2018](#bib.bibx10) ] body and finger coordinates in addition to Kinect V2 skeleton information.
- • We have proposed an evaluation protocol and reported two benchmark results using 3D ResNets [ [Tran et al. (2018](#bib.bibx45) ] and IDT [ [Wang and Schmid (2013](#bib.bibx48) ] to underpin future research on this dataset.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section [2.](#S2) , we give an overview of the SLR literature and other publicly available [Sign Language Recognition](#id40.40.id40) ( [SLR](#id40.40.id40) ) datasets. In Section [3.](#S3) , we introduce the new BosphorusSign 22k dataset. We then describe the baseline methods and share our experimental results in Section [4.](#S4) . Finally, we conclude this paper in Sections [5.](#S5) and [6.](#S6) by analyzing our baseline results, discussion and future work.

## 2. Related Work

Since the work of ? ), there have been numerous studies on the isolated [SLR](#id40.40.id40) task. More recently, utilization of state-of-the-art deep learning models [ [Koller et al. (2019](#bib.bibx26) , [Zhang et al. (2016](#bib.bibx52) ] have resulted in better representation learning that is capable of achieving high accuracies over hundreds of unique sign glosses. Because of the spatio-temporal characteristics of the [ASLR](#id3.3.id3) problem, popular methods from video (human action &amp; activity recognition) [ [Wang and Schmid (2013](#bib.bibx48) , [Carreira and](#bib.bibx11)

[Zisserman (2017](#bib.bibx11)

] and speech recognition [ [Graves and Schmidhuber (2005](#bib.bibx18) ] fields have been widely applied with success to the [SLR](#id40.40.id40) problem. Since the focus of this paper is on computer vision based [ASLR](#id3.3.id3) methods, the main variations among solutions proposed to this solution lie in their methods of data representation and temporal sign modeling.

Of the present methods in the literature, a large majority use sequences of RGB video frames and/or depth information [ [Cui et al. (2017](#bib.bibx13) , [Wang et al. (2016](#bib.bibx49) , [Wang et al. (2019](#bib.bibx50) ] . Some methods extract additional features from these input sources such as optical flow and coordinates calculated by human pose capture methods such as Kinect [ [Shotton et al. (2012](#bib.bibx37) ] and OpenPose [ [Cao et al. (2018](#bib.bibx10) ] . A large number of methods extract state of the art features such as 2D [ [Koller et al. (2016a](#bib.bibx24) ] and 3D [Convolutional Neural Network](#id7.7.id7) ( [CNN](#id7.7.id7) ) outputs [ [Joze and Koller (2018](#bib.bibx22) , [Huang et al. (2015](#bib.bibx21) , [Camgoz et al. (2016a](#bib.bibx4) ] , [Improved Dense Trajectory](#id25.25.id25) ( [IDT](#id25.25.id25) ) features [ [Özdemir et al. (2016](#bib.bibx32) ] , hand appearance and trajectory features [ [Özdemir et al. (2018](#bib.bibx33) , [He et al. (2016](#bib.bibx20) , [Metaxas et al. (2018](#bib.bibx30) ] . The use of spatial attention as in ? ) to focus learning on the signing space and temporal attention as in ? ) and ? ; ? ) are also among current popular research directions.

In terms of temporal segmentation and modeling, isolated videos of sign glosses often consist of varying length and complexity, requiring the use of temporal modeling. In ? ) and ? ), [Hidden Markov Models](#id20.20.id20) are used with hand shape features and trajectories, while ? ) uses [HMMs](#id20.20.id20) to train hand shape classifiers from weakly labeled sign videos. In ? ), [Long Short-Term Memory Networks](#id27.27.id27) are used with gradient histograms while in ? ) they are used with [Connectionist Temporal Classification](#id10.10.id10) ( [CTC](#id10.10.id10) ) and neural network features to learn sign languages. Based on the works of ? ) and ? ) and the results of popular gesture recognition challenges such as Chalearn LAP [ [Wan et al. (2017](#bib.bibx47) ] , [SLR](#id40.40.id40) studies with 3D [CNNs](#id7.7.id7) currently tend to show higher performances in large datasets compared to other deep learning approaches utilizing [LSTMs](#id27.27.id27) and other popular methods. This generalization loses validity in the case of continuous [SLR](#id40.40.id40) where the average clip length exceeds a few seconds.

In isolated Sign Language Recognition, the difficulties in obtaining high quality annotated videos has limited the amount of available public datasets. To the best of our knowledge, currently there exist four similar public available large scale isolated [SLR](#id40.40.id40) datasets, which can be seen in Table [1](#S2.T1) , while Chinese Sign Language (CSL) recognition dataset [ [Zhang et al. (2016](#bib.bibx52) ] and MS-ASL [ [Joze and Koller (2018](#bib.bibx22) ] being the most recent ones. BosphorusSign 22k differentiates from these datasets as follows: Contrary to Chinese Sign Language (CSL) recognition dataset, which was recorded in front of a white background, BosphorusSign 22k dataset was captured using a Chroma Key background, which we believe will be beneficial for researchers who would like to utilize data augmentation techniques in their pipelines to improve their models generalization capabilities. We acknowledge the fact that MS-ASL is one of the new frontiers in sign language research as it initiated large scale "in the wild" isolated sign language recognition. However, the dataset is composed of publicly available YouTube videos. As Microsoft does not own the copyright of these videos, the availability of the data is not guaranteed. As of the submission of this paper, 290 videos are no longer publicly available which will potentially increase in the future, making comparison of future research against previously reported benchmarks harder. Additionally, there is the new SMILE DSGS corpus [ [Ebling et al. (2018](#bib.bibx16) ] , which hasn't been fully publicly available and its evaluation protocol is yet to be defined.

## 3. BosphorusSign 22k Dataset

In this study, we present BosphorusSign 22k 1 1 1 [https://www.bosphorussign.com](https://www.bosphorussign.com/) , a new benchmark dataset for vision-based user-independent isolated [SLR](#id40.40.id40) . Our dataset is based on the BosphorusSign [ [Camgoz et al. (2016c](#bib.bibx6) ] corpus which was collected with the purpose of helping both linguistic and computer science communities. It contains isolated videos of Turkish Sign Language glosses from three different domains: Health, finance and commonly used everyday signs. Videos in this dataset were performed by six native signers, as shown in Figure [1](#S3.F1) , which makes this dataset valuable for user independent sign language studies.

Figure 1 : Native signer participants of the BosphorusSign 22k dataset. (We propose using the left-most five signers as the training set and keep the remaining for evaluation.)

<!-- image -->

All of the sign video recordings in the dataset were captured using Microsoft Kinect v2 [ [Zhang (2012](#bib.bibx53) ] with 1080p (1920x1080 pixels) video resolution at 30 frames per second. We believe having a higher resolution is essential for sign language recognition when interpreting the appearance information related to hand shape and movements. All of the videos share the same recording setup where signers stood in front of a Chroma-Key background which is 1.5 meter far away from the camera.

Specifications of the BosphorusSign 22k dataset can be seen in Table [2](#S3.T2) . Since the dataset was collected using Microsoft Kinect v2, we provide RGB video, depth map and skeleton information of the signer for all sign videos in the dataset. Moreover, we also provide OpenPose [ [Cao et al. (2018](#bib.bibx10) ] joints, which include facial landmarks and hand joint positions in addition to body pose information. An example of provided modalities of the BosphorusSign 22k dataset can be seen in Figure [2](#S3.F2) .

BosphorusSign 22k has a vocabulary of 744 sign glosses; 428 in Health while having 163 in Finance domains as well as another 174 commonly used sign glosses. Properties of the proposed dataset and how it differentiates from the BosphorusSign corpus can be found in Table [3](#S3.T3) .

Figure 2 : Modalities of BosphorusSign 22k . Top: (left) RGB frame and (right) depth image Bottom: (left) OpenPose and (right) Kinect v2 outputs.

<!-- image -->

In this work, we changed several aspects of the BosphorusSign dataset. First of all to set a baseline that would extend over the whole dataset, we merged all subsets and conducted our experiments accordingly. Further details of our experimental protocol can be found in the Section [4.1.](#S4.SS1) Secondly, we manually inspected all the sign videos and eliminated erroneous recordings. Furthermore, we split signs that were semantically same but morphologically different. We also collapsed signs with similar manual features. The goal of this change was to benchmark the capabilities of the state-of-the-art models on learning meaningful representations for manual aspects of the sign glosses. However, we will be also releasing an uncollapsed version of the dataset. The changes on the BosphorusSign dataset are mostly focused on improving and cleaning the dataset and defining an evaluation protocol. The dataset will be publicly available for research purposes upon submitting an EULA to the authors.

## 4. Baseline Recognition Methods and Experiments

In this section, we provide training and test protocols of the BosphorusSign 22k dataset. We then describe baseline methods in detail and share our extensive experimental results.

### 4.1. Experiment Protocol

We defined our protocol by dividing the BosphorusSign 22k dataset into training and test sets in a signer independent manner where we use one signer for test and others for training. This yielded us a test set of 4,524 sign samples and a training set containing 18,018 samples. To set a baseline on the new dataset and the evaluation protocols, we perform isolated sign language recognition experiments and report classification accuracies on the test set with only one signer.

### 4.2. Baseline Methods

As for benchmark methods, there is no agreed-upon state-of-the-art approach in the isolated SLR literature, and researchers use different methods on different datasets [ [Camgoz et al. (2017](#bib.bibx7) , [Joze and Koller (2018](#bib.bibx22) , [Zhang et al. (2016](#bib.bibx52) ] . However, in the related field of action recognition, researches rely on benchmark datasets to compare their approaches against the state-of-the-art. Both 3D ResNets [ [Tran et al. (2018](#bib.bibx45) ] and Improved Dense Trajectories - IDT [ [Wang and Schmid (2013](#bib.bibx48) ] are comparable state-of-the-art methods for action recognition, which have also yielded good performance on SLR [ [Özdemir et al. (2016](#bib.bibx32) ] . Therefore, we have chosen 3D ResNets and IDT as our baseline approaches to cover both deep learning based representation learning techniques as well as hand crafted feature based methods.

Improved Dense Trajectories - [IDT](#id25.25.id25) : Although deep learning based models have become very popular recently, handcrafted approaches are still representative and competitive enough to be used in video recognition problems such as human action recognition and sign language recognition [ [Tran et al. (2018](#bib.bibx45) ] . Inspired by this and to also give further insight to the reader instead of just reporting baselines using a deep learning based approach, we have used Improved Dense Trajectories ( [IDT](#id25.25.id25) ) [ [Wang and Schmid (2013](#bib.bibx48) ] which is one of the most successful handcrafted methods with competitive performance for human action recognition and was used in sign language and gesture recognition recently [ [Özdemir et al. (2016](#bib.bibx32) , [Peng et al. (2015](#bib.bibx35) ] . [IDT](#id25.25.id25) extracts local spatial features [Histograms of Oriented Gradients](#id21.21.id21) ( [HOG](#id21.21.id21) ) [ [Dalal and Triggs (2005](#bib.bibx14) ] , and local temporal features [Histograms of Optical Flow](#id22.22.id22) ( [HOF](#id22.22.id22) ) [ [Laptev et al. (2008](#bib.bibx28) ] and [Motion Boundary Histograms](#id28.28.id28) ( [MBH](#id28.28.id28) ) [ [Dalal et al. (2006](#bib.bibx15) ] from the trajectories computed from dense optical flow field.

For recognizing sign language videos from the BosphorusSign 22k dataset, we have used a recognition pipeline similar to the one proposed by ? ). We first extracted trajectories from every sign video. After extracting trajectories, we randomly sampled trajectories from the training set, assuming these trajectories represent the overarching distribution. Then, [Principal Component Analysis](#id34.34.id34) ( [PCA](#id34.34.id34) ) was applied to each component; namely [HOG](#id21.21.id21) , [HOF](#id22.22.id22) and [MBH](#id28.28.id28) . Using [PCA](#id34.34.id34) outputs, we performed [Gaussian Mixture Model](#id19.19.id19) ( [GMM](#id19.19.id19) ) to cluster each component of the trajectories. Finally, [Fisher Vectors](#id15.15.id15) were computed from each component of trajectory descriptors from each sign video using the parameters of [PCA](#id34.34.id34) and [GMM](#id19.19.id19) . Using these representations we trained a Linear [Support Vector Machines](#id44.44.id44) using different combinations of concatenated [FVs](#id15.15.id15) components.

3D Residual Networks with Mixed Convolutions: With the recent success of deep learning [ [Goodfellow et al. (2016](#bib.bibx17) ] on tasks such as image and object recognition [ [Krizhevsky et al. (2012](#bib.bibx27) ] , researchers have also started to build deep architectures for human action recognition where both spatial and temporal dimension are exploited [ [Simonyan and Zisserman (2014](#bib.bibx38) , [Tran et al. (2015](#bib.bibx44) , [Carreira and](#bib.bibx11)

[Zisserman (2017](#bib.bibx11)

] . In this work, we have used a recently proposed video recognition method, which is based on 3D ResNet architecture with mixed 2D-3D convolutions, also called MC3 in ? ). The model consist of two residual blocks with 3D convolutions, three residual blocks with 2D convolutions and a fully connected layer as its classification layer. This network was built based on the hypothesis that learning temporal dynamics is beneficial in early layers while the higher levels semantic knowledge can be learnt in late layers [ [Tran et al. (2018](#bib.bibx45) ] .

As our second baseline, we trained MC3 models and investigated the effects of fine-tuning different residual blocks of the network using the Kinetics-400 dataset [ [Carreira and](#bib.bibx11)

[Zisserman (2017](#bib.bibx11)

] . The proposed training method for this model used randomized clips of frames as inputs, which is not suitable for our problem because randomized clips may include different non-recurring parts with the same isolated sign gloss. Therefore, at the training phase, we randomly sampled batches of uniformly sampled frames from sign videos to give our networks sufficient coverage over the frames.

### 4.3. Implementation Details

To evaluate baseline methods on the BosphorusSign 22k dataset, we have used the publicly available implementation in ? ) for extracting [IDT](#id25.25.id25) features and PyTorch [ [Paszke et al. (2017](#bib.bibx34) ] implementation of 3D ResNet model with mixed convolutions.

During training, we uniformly sampled 16 frames form each sign gloss with sizes of 112x112 pixels before feeding them to our networks. Sign clips are horizontally flipped a probability of 0.5 to be able to generalize over signers with different dominant hands. After preprocessing, we train our network using Adam optimizer [ [Kingma and Ba (2014](#bib.bibx23) ] with batch size of 32 on a NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU. For testing, we performed the same preprocessing approach as in training except horizontal flipping of frame clips.

### 4.4. Experimental Results

We start our experiments by training several [IDT](#id25.25.id25) based model with varying feature components, results of which can be seen in Table [4](#S4.T4) . Our results have shown that using motion features separately, [HOF](#id22.22.id22) and [MBH](#id28.28.id28) , has yielded better results (83.29% and 86.63%) than using only appearance features, trajectory information (63.68%) and [HOG](#id21.21.id21) (76.59%). Since the trajectory information only contains the position of the trajectory (mostly the position of hand regions in our case), it is expected that it cannot fully represent motion or appearance based features which have higher dimensionality and cannot encode more complex information about the sign or hand shape.

Moreover, in the case of fusion of the trajectory components, our experiments have shown that using only [HOG](#id21.21.id21) , [HOF](#id22.22.id22) and [MBH](#id28.28.id28) features together improves our recognition accuracy (88.53%), while adding the trajectory (TRAJ) information sightly decreases the performance of our system (87.86%). Although the performance of our system is very close in the case of fusing multiple components, we can see that using [HOG](#id21.21.id21) features with other features has improved our recognition performance in all cases. This supports the idea that appearance representation obtained using hand crafted features, such as [HOG](#id21.21.id21) , is useful along with the temporal information when recognizing signs where the manual features of the sign are the main differentiating aspect between target classes.

As for our deep learning baseline, we performed several experiments on fine-tuning different residual blocks of the MC3 network [ [Tran et al. (2018](#bib.bibx45) ] . In our first experiment, we first compared training our networks from scratch against using a pre-trained network (on Kinetics-400 dataset) and only training the final fully connected (fc) layer.

As it can be seen in Table [5](#S4.T5) , training the network from scratch performed slightly better. We believe this is due to the fact that pre-trained network has never seen any sign samples, hence some of the essential spatio-temporal information that forms the sign is lost until it reaches the final fully connected layer. Using this insight, we decided to fine-tune other layers of the pre-trained network in additional to the last fully connected layer. We found that fine tuning the last 3 blocks to yield the best results for our task, an Top-1 accuracy of 78.85% and and a Top-5 accuracy of 94.76% on the test set.

## 5. Analysis of Results and Discussion

Although the 88.53% Top-1 accuracy achieved by [IDT](#id25.25.id25) is quite high for a 744 class problem, there is certainly still room for improvement. On the other hand, 3D ResNets, which are general-purpose video classification algorithms perform worse. We believe this is due to their inability to model longer-range temporal characteristics. Possible improvements include additional modalities and better temporal modeling.

We further investigated false classifications to gain further insight. For example, INSURANCE, INTERNET and COLD sign glosses are commonly confused with FUND, TEACHING and FACE respectively. Upon investigation we discovered that this is due to baseline methods' inability to model fine grained hand shapes. As seen in Figure [3](#S5.F3) , while our models were able to distinguish the sign by its motion, it fails to discriminate it using the similar handshapes. We believe this is due to the image resolution our networks are trained for in the case of MC3 model and the representation limitations of the [HOG](#id21.21.id21) features for our [IDT](#id25.25.id25) baseline. One way to tackle this problem could be to utilize specialized networks, such as Deep Hand proposed by ? ), and use it as another modality in our recognition pipeline.

Figure 3 : Test sample of INSURANCE sign gloss (left) misclassified as FUND (right).

<!-- image -->

In addition, our analysis have shown that PRICE sign gloss is confused with SHOPPING sign gloss (see Figure [4](#S5.F4) ) because the number of repetitions of the same motion sub-unit is different in both signs. Although both signs have the same hand shape and movements, signers performing the SHOPPING sign gloss repeat the same motion sub-unit more than PRICE.

Figure 4 : Test sample of PRICE sign (left) misclassified as SHOPPING (right)

<!-- image -->

Furthermore, when looking at the Top-5 recognition accuracy on experiments with 3D ResNets, we can see that most of the misclassified signs are successfully classified among the top-5. Thus, we believe that focusing on problems mentioned above will help us to improve recognition performance. Baseline results also show that [IDT](#id25.25.id25) , as a handcrafted approach, is still performing well on [SLR](#id40.40.id40) as it can comprehensively model appearance and motion information obtained from the signer in the frame compared to the 3D ResNet model trained without any specific guidance. Another factor contributing to this performance disparity is the input size which is 112x112 for MC3 networks and 640x360 for the [IDT](#id25.25.id25) .

## 6. Conclusion

In this paper, we present BosphorusSign 22k , a new signer-independent [SLR](#id40.40.id40) evaluation benchmark. The dataset contains over 22k samples of isolated videos, of 744 unique Turkish Sign glosses performed by six native signers. To underpin future research, we applied two successful video recognition methods from the literature, namely [IDT](#id25.25.id25) and 3D ResNets (MC3). We share our quantitative results as well as qualitative samples, providing further insight to the reader.

As shown by our experimental results, there is still room for improvement in signer-independent [SLR](#id40.40.id40) for cases where the manual aspects of the sign subtlety differentiates from other classes. As future work we plan to exploit the capture setup of our dataset, namely its suitability for data augmentation, and extend our protocol to investigate environment independent [SLR](#id40.40.id40) . BosphorusSign 22k also enables further research into using the depth information to explore multi-modal fusion approaches.

## 7. Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by the TUBITAK Project #117E059 and TAM Project #2007K120610 under the Turkish Ministry of Development.

## 8. References

## References

- Aran (2008 Aran, O. (2008). Vision-based Sign Language Recognition: Modeling and Recognizing Isolated Signs with Manual and Non-Manual Components . Ph.D. thesis, Bogazici University.
- Bahar et al. (2019 Bahar, P., Bieschke, T., and Ney, H. (2019). A comparative study on end-to-end speech to text translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08870 .
- Bahdanau et al. (2017 Bahdanau, D., Bosc, T., Jastrzębski, S., Grefenstette, E., Vincent, P., and Bengio, Y. (2017). Learning to Compute Word Embeddings on the Fly. arXiv:1706.00286 .
- Camgoz et al. (2016a Camgoz, N. C., Hadfield, S., Koller, O., and Bowden, R. (2016a). Using convolutional 3d neural networks for user-independent continuous gesture recognition. In 2016 23rd International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) , pages 49-54. IEEE.
- Camgoz et al. (2016b Camgoz, N. C., Kindiroglu, A. A., and Akarun, L. (2016b). Sign Language Recognition for Assisting the Deaf in Hospitals. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Human Behavior Understanding (HBU) .
- Camgoz et al. (2016c Camgoz, N. C., Kindiroglu, A. A., Karabuklu, S., Kelepir, M., Ozsoy, A. S., and Akarun, L. (2016c). BosphorusSign: A Turkish Sign Language Recognition Corpus in Health and Finance Domains. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC) .
- Camgoz et al. (2017 Camgoz, N. C., Hadfield, S., Koller, O., and Bowden, R. (2017). Subunets: End-to-end hand shape and continuous sign language recognition. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) .
- Camgoz et al. (2018 Camgoz, N. C., Hadfield, S., Koller, O., Bowden, R., and Ney, H. (2018). Neural Sign Language Translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .
- Camgoz et al. (2020 Camgoz, N. C., Koller, O., Hadfield, S., and Bowden, R. (2020). Sign Language Transformers: Joint End-to-end Sign Language Recognition and Translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .
- Cao et al. (2018 Cao, Z., Hidalgo, G., Simon, T., Wei, S.-E., and Sheikh, Y. (2018). OpenPose: realtime multi-person 2D pose estimation using Part Affinity Fields. In arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08008 .
- Carreira and Zisserman (2017 Carreira, J. and Zisserman, A. (2017). Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics dataset. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 4724-4733, July.
- Chai et al. (2014 Chai, X., Wang, H., and Chen, X. (2014). The devisign large vocabulary of chinese sign language database and baseline evaluations. Technical report VIPL-TR-14-SLR-001. Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing Technology, CAS .
- Cui et al. (2017 Cui, R., Liu, H., and Zhang, C. (2017). Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks for Continuous Sign Language Recognition by Staged Optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .
- Dalal and Triggs (2005 Dalal, N. and Triggs, B. (2005). Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection. In 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR'05) , volume 1, pages 886-893. IEEE.
- Dalal et al. (2006 Dalal, N., Triggs, B., and Schmid, C. (2006). Human detection using oriented histograms of flow and appearance. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2006 , pages 428-441. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
- Ebling et al. (2018 Ebling, S., Camgoz, N. C., Braem, P. B., Tissi, K., Sidler-Miserez, S., Stoll, S., Hadfield, S., Haug, T., Bowden, R., Tornay, S., Razavi, M., and Magimai-Doss, M. (2018). SMILE Swiss German Sign Language Dataset. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC) .
- Goodfellow et al. (2016 Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016). Deep Learning . MIT press.
- Graves and Schmidhuber (2005 Graves, A. and Schmidhuber, J. (2005). Framewise phoneme classification with bidirectional lstm and other neural network architectures. Neural networks , 18(5-6):602-610.
- Hanke et al. (2010 Hanke, T., König, L., Wagner, S., and Matthes, S. (2010). DGS Corpus &amp; Dicta-Sign: The Hamburg Studio Setup. In Proceedings of the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Corpora and Sign Language Technologies .
- He et al. (2016 He, J., Liu, Z., and Zhang, J. (2016). Chinese sign language recognition based on trajectory and hand shape features. In 2016 Visual Communications and Image Processing (VCIP) , pages 1-4. IEEE.
- Huang et al. (2015 Huang, J., Zhou, W., Li, H., and Li, W. (2015). Sign language recognition using 3d convolutional neural networks. In 2015 IEEE international conference on multimedia and expo (ICME) , pages 1-6. IEEE.
- Joze and Koller (2018 Joze, H. R. V. and Koller, O. (2018). MS-ASL: A large-scale data set and benchmark for understanding american sign language. CoRR , abs/1812.01053.
- Kingma and Ba (2014 Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR , abs/1412.6980.
- Koller et al. (2016a Koller, O., Ney, H., and Bowden, R. (2016a). Deep Hand: How to Train a CNN on 1 Million Hand Images When Your Data Is Continuous and Weakly Labelled. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) .
- Koller et al. (2016b Koller, O., Zargaran, S., Ney, H., and Bowden, R. (2016b). Deep Sign: Hybrid CNN-HMM for Continuous Sign Language Recognition. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) .
- Koller et al. (2019 Koller, O., Camgoz, N. C., Bowden, R., and Ney, H. (2019). Weakly Supervised Learning with Multi-Stream CNN-LSTM-HMMs to Discover Sequential Parallelism in Sign Language Videos. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) .
- Krizhevsky et al. (2012 Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012). ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) .
- Laptev et al. (2008 Laptev, I., Marszalek, M., Schmid, C., and Rozenfeld, B. (2008). Learning realistic human actions from movies. In 2008 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1-8. IEEE.
- Liu et al. (2016 Liu, T., Zhou, W., and Li, H. (2016). Sign language recognition with long short-term memory. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , pages 2871-2875. IEEE.
- Metaxas et al. (2018 Metaxas, D., Dilsizian, M., and Neidle, C. (2018). Linguistically-driven framework for computationally efficient and scalable sign recognition. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) , Miyazaki, Japan, May. European Language Resources Association (ELRA).
- Neidle et al. (2012 Neidle, C., Thangali, A., and Sclaroff, S. (2012). Challenges in development of the american sign language lexicon video dataset (asllvd) corpus. In 5th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Interactions between Corpus and Lexicon, LREC . Citeseer.
- Özdemir et al. (2016 Özdemir, O., Camgöz, N. C., and Akarun, L. (2016). Isolated sign language recognition using improved dense trajectories. In 2016 24th Signal Processing and Communication Application Conference (SIU) , pages 1961-1964. IEEE.
- Özdemir et al. (2018 Özdemir, O., Kindiroglu, A. A., and Akarun, L. (2018). Isolated sign language recognition with fast hand descriptors. In 2018 26th Signal Processing and Communications Applications Conference (SIU) , pages 1-4. IEEE.
- Paszke et al. (2017 Paszke, A., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Chanan, G., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Lin, Z., Desmaison, A., Antiga, L., and Lerer, A. (2017). Automatic differentiation in PyTorch. In NIPS Autodiff Workshop .
- Peng et al. (2015 Peng, X., Wang, L., Cai, Z., and Qiao, Y. (2015). Action and gesture temporal spotting with super vector representation. In Computer Vision - ECCV 2014 Workshops , pages 518-527. Springer International Publishing.
- Schembri et al. (2013 Schembri, A., Fenlon, J., Rentelis, R., Reynolds, S., and Cormier, K. (2013). Building the British Sign Language Corpus. Language Documentation &amp; Conservation (LD&amp;C) , 7.
- Shotton et al. (2012 Shotton, J., Girshick, R., Fitzgibbon, A., Sharp, T., Cook, M., Finocchio, M., Moore, R., Kohli, P., Criminisi, A., Kipman, A., et al. (2012). Efficient human pose estimation from single depth images. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) , 35(12):2821-2840.
- Simonyan and Zisserman (2014 Simonyan, K. and Zisserman, A. (2014). Two-stream Convolutional Networks for Action Recognition in Videos. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) .
- Starner et al. (1998 Starner, T., Weaver, J., and Pentland, A. (1998). Real-time american sign language recognition using desk and wearable computer based video. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 20(12):1371-1375.
- Stoll et al. (2018 Stoll, S., Camgoz, N. C., Hadfield, S., and Bowden, R. (2018). Sign Language Production using Neural Machine Translation and Generative Adversarial Networks. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) .
- Stoll et al. (2020 Stoll, S., Camgoz, N. C., Hadfield, S., and Bowden, R. (2020). Text2Sign: Towards Sign Language Production using Neural Machine Translation and Generative Adversarial Networks. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) .
- Sutton-Spence and Woll (1999 Sutton-Spence, R. and Woll, B. (1999). The Linguistics of British Sign Language: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press.
- Suzgun et al. (2015 Suzgun, M. M., Ozdemir, H., Camgoz, N. C., Kindiroglu, A., Basaran, D., Togay, C., and Akarun, L. (2015). Hospisign: An Interactive Sign Language Platform for Hearing Impaired. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Animation and Gaming Technologies (Eurasia Graphics) .
- Tran et al. (2015 Tran, D., Bourdev, L., Fergus, R., Torresani, L., and Paluri, M. (2015). Learning Spatiotemporal Features with 3D Convolutional Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) .
- Tran et al. (2018 Tran, D., Wang, H., Torresani, L., Ray, J., LeCun, Y., and Paluri, M. (2018). A closer look at spatiotemporal convolutions for action recognition. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 6450-6459.
- Varol et al. (2017 Varol, G., Laptev, I., and Schmid, C. (2017). Long-term temporal convolutions for action recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 40(6):1510-1517.
- Wan et al. (2017 Wan, J., Escalera, S., Anbarjafari, G., Jair Escalante, H., Baró, X., Guyon, I., Madadi, M., Allik, J., Gorbova, J., Lin, C., et al. (2017). Results and analysis of chalearn lap multi-modal isolated and continuous gesture recognition, and real versus fake expressed emotions challenges. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3189-3197.
- Wang and Schmid (2013 Wang, H. and Schmid, C. (2013). Action recognition with improved trajectories. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 3551-3558. IEEE.
- Wang et al. (2016 Wang, H., Chai, X., Hong, X., Zhao, G., and Chen, X. (2016). Isolated Sign Language Recognition with Grassmann Covariance Matrices. ACM Transactions on Accessible Computing , 8(4).
- Wang et al. (2019 Wang, H., Chai, X., and Chen, X. (2019). A novel sign language recognition framework using hierarchical grassmann covariance matrix. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , 21(11):2806-2814.
- Yuan et al. (2019 Yuan, Q., Wan, J., Lin, C., Li, Y., Miao, Q., Li, S. Z., Wang, L., and Lu, Y. (2019). Global and local spatial-attention network for isolated gesture recognition. In Chinese Conference on Biometric Recognition , pages 84-93. Springer.
- Zhang et al. (2016 Zhang, J., Zhou, W., Xie, C., Pu, J., and Li, H. (2016). Chinese sign language recognition with adaptive hmm. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) , pages 1-6. IEEE.
- Zhang (2012 Zhang, Z. (2012). Microsoft kinect sensor and its effect. IEEE MultiMedia , 19(2):4-10, April.

## References

- [[964502ea316fe9049c464a0925e3dc4246023a0d]] — Weakly Supervised Learning with Multi-Stream CNN-LSTM-HMMs to Discover Sequential Parallelism in Sign Language Videos (2020)
- [[05dcdfece56d1869895f53ed581d8ad64118c05f]] — Sign Language Transformers: Joint End-to-End Sign Language Recognition and Translation (2020)
- [[7f6231aae6e5eb5b62f85429f3ad8eaa96fee11e]] — Text2Sign: Towards Sign Language Production Using Neural Machine Translation and Generative Adversarial Networks (2020)
- [[740bc22ee3cf40eb85bc801bc51377991604fd9d]] — A Comparative Study on End-to-End Speech to Text Translation (2019)
- [[5ebb7a9439326ec0bbfd7364177ba34a8848aacb]] — Global and Local Spatial-Attention Network for Isolated Gesture Recognition (2019)
- [[33a4f68e9cec8f76213b0a7f8c704651344553e1]] — A Novel Sign Language Recognition Framework Using Hierarchical Grassmann Covariance Matrix (2019)
- [[9e8db1519245426f3a78752a3d8360484f4626b1]] — OpenPose: Realtime Multi-Person 2D Pose Estimation Using Part Affinity Fields (2018)
- [[310a8e2c9f2650fa2e44fdf0d82d11c0cb3e387e]] — MS-ASL: A Large-Scale Data Set and Benchmark for Understanding American Sign Language (2018)
- [[212d7af298a4bd9090b834293067d2f091a95cfc]] — Sign Language Production using Neural Machine Translation and Generative Adversarial Networks (2018)
- [[644602c65a5d8f30e62be027eb7b47f7c335191a]] — Neural Sign Language Translation (2018)
- [[eee05fad72aaa6c14e14525e74f35a923c0077ff]] — SMILE Swiss German Sign Language Dataset (2018)
- [[8f32d6a2272efc36826309034105223a5fceb1ca]] — Linguistically-driven Framework for Computationally Efficient and Scalable Sign Recognition (2018)
- [[7b65f1cd8b8bb5066bc8bcff0e49e3ef80e451de]] — Isolated sign language recognition with fast hand descriptors (2018)
- [[89c3050522a0bb9820c32dc7444e003ef0d3e2e4]] — A Closer Look at Spatiotemporal Convolutions for Action Recognition (2017)
- [[b36a5bb1707bb9c70025294b3a310138aae8327a]] — Automatic differentiation in PyTorch (2017)
- [[a6adefcb723a3e52f24987115cc3ae7f6d08283c]] — Results and Analysis of ChaLearn LAP Multi-modal Isolated and Continuous Gesture Recognition, and Real Versus Fake Expressed Emotions Challenges (2017)
- [[a10cd29fec9dca66250dbde19db5e831f7ce6406]] — SubUNets: End-to-End Hand Shape and Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2017)
- [[a3c850001340266d4b2e7479f78387b5fda0815c]] — Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks for Continuous Sign Language Recognition by Staged Optimization (2017)
- [[970f474fc5408f079f627adbc9a300dfca7e317e]] — Learning to Compute Word Embeddings On the Fly (2017)
- [[b61a3f8b80bbd44f24544dc915f52fd30bbdf485]] — Quo Vadis, Action Recognition? A New Model and the Kinetics Dataset (2017)
- [[8b74252625c91375f55cbdd2e6415e752a281d10]] — Using Convolutional 3D Neural Networks for User-independent continuous gesture recognition (2016)
- [[565d23ff01100e9f5f74e6f3d2f2051c23c1086f]] — Chinese sign language recognition based on trajectory and hand shape features (2016)
- [[242de2d6a55e9c86c450d69c1e46971a1a863cb3]] — Sign Language Recognition for Assisting the Deaf in Hospitals (2016)
- [[31b4f2a9fcd8e45a5b4f4cf95e3caa8b460c062f]] — Deep Sign: Hybrid CNN-HMM for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2016)
- [[5c32fa84747c4b9d0cf63ee038dddae644ac53e0]] — Sign language recognition with long short-term memory (2016)
- [[7026f35b75b06cb5102c80c7dba493b4d303fbe6]] — Chinese sign language recognition with adaptive HMM (2016)
- [[3f56d232921fe7255beedd961a557007d54e31f0]] — Deep Hand: How to Train a CNN on 1 Million Hand Images When Your Data is Continuous and Weakly Labelled (2016)
- [[5f4b7617bf6bcf92500ccec83c31b4a684e77331]] — Isolated sign language recognition using Improved Dense Trajectories (2016)
- [[95f8cfd71e7c1aa5ae720e1bd68be2fd7ef1047e]] — Isolated Sign Language Recognition with Grassmann Covariance Matrices (2016)
- [[ea84cd78c05bb4051f22bc7b5f2beb340bfc811f]] — BosphorusSign: A Turkish Sign Language Recognition Corpus in Health and Finance Domains (2016)
- [[179462c2a03b1a5c3f98fac86c992c116e152b82]] — Long-Term Temporal Convolutions for Action Recognition (2016)
- [[6f1f9f27a679cd3f8b97079577676112cd752713]] — Sign Language Recognition using 3D convolutional neural networks (2015)
- [[a6cb366736791bcccc5c8639de5a8f9636bf87e8]] — Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization (2014)
- [[d25c65d261ea0e6a458be4c50c40ffe5bc508f77]] — Learning Spatiotemporal Features with 3D Convolutional Networks (2014)
- [[896f4d87257abd0f628c1ffbbfdac38c86a56f50]] — Action and Gesture Temporal Spotting with Super Vector Representation (2014)
- [[67dccc9a856b60bdc4d058d83657a089b8ad4486]] — Two-Stream Convolutional Networks for Action Recognition in Videos (2014)
- [[1113b4fcf644616e2587eacead2bca4b794ac47d]] — Efficient Human Pose Estimation from Single Depth Images (2013)
- [[890614f30de4d2e651b66858e871ea5fe2f1d98a]] — Building the British Sign Language Corpus (2013)
- [[abd1c342495432171beb7ca8fd9551ef13cbd0ff]] — ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks (2012)
- [[5298f435adfea49af3ef5b56bfea31a63c6f59af]] — Microsoft Kinect Sensor and Its Effect (2012)
- [[02a98118ce990942432c0147ff3c0de756b4b76a]] — Learning realistic human actions from movies (2008)
- [[44f3ac3277c2eb6e5599739eb875888c46e21d4c]] — Human Detection Using Oriented Histograms of Flow and Appearance (2006)
- [[e8b12467bdc20bde976750b8a28decdb33246d1d]] — Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection (2005)
- [[5536d42ce80e129be8cae172ed1b7659c769d31d]] — 2005 Special Issue: Framewise phoneme classification with bidirectional LSTM and other neural network architectures (2005)
- [[051cd3f8cc34fa06c1440fce162a3cf8b7344ea3]] — The Linguistics of British Sign Language: Index of signs in the text (1999)
- [[ccd238120e1eb620f4bcf235dc549619560f2857]] — Real-Time American Sign Language Recognition Using Desk and Wearable Computer Based Video (1998)
- [[4f8d648c52edf74e41b0996128aa536e13cc7e82]] — Deep Learning (2016)
- [[8c5f9373e6d02638ccd7572930450f356529007b]] — HOSPISIGN: AN INTERACTIVE SIGN LANGUAGE PLATFORM FOR HEARING IMPAIRED (2015)
- The devisign large vocabulary of chinese sign language database and baseline evaluations (2014)
- [[8bd62710fdaac5e5558bafffecbe4d3107a0c31c]] — Challenges in development of the American Sign Language Lexicon Video Dataset (ASLLVD) corpus (2012)
- [[f8bcd4a198c234688bfbea8cc77bf1463fbd19eb]] — DGS Corpus & Dicta-Sign: The Hamburg Studio Setup (2010)
- [[2b866f3e5d67243db7b26cc1d1d8864becfc4ebd]] — VISION BASED SIGN LANGUAGE RECOGNITION: MODELING AND RECOGNIZING ISOLATED SIGNS WITH MANUAL AND NON-MANUAL COMPONENTS (2008)
- [[070874b011f8eb2b18c8aa521ad0a7a932b4d9ad]] — Author manuscript, published in "International Conference on Computer Vision (2013)" Action Recognition with Improved Trajectories ()

## Cited by

- [[8ad60ee1ff1cff9200c701f4799683037705824a]] — SignAgent: Agentic LLMs for Linguistically-Grounded Sign Language Annotation and Dataset Curation (2026)
- [[7b9d787fcbb3db7a613c2c60ee68db0bd3d87f23]] — Multinational sign language recognition framework for inclusive multimedia communication (2026)
- [[6dadfd65c1d1380b4feaddd7241c4a893c73243d]] — RoCoISLR: A Romanian Corpus for Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[bcd0355e9e26d92262190f39cf47cfe2c6be1cce]] — Hybrid Deep Learning Models for Arabic Sign Language Recognition in Healthcare Applications (2025)
- [[f6387e1cc2d0975b1858fabd70bb7afcb7cc552a]] — Empowering turkish sign language recognition with dynamic time warping and decision trees (2025)
- [[5dfedbacff35d4004bae624b0744007e9ad1ab61]] — Hierarchical Windowed Graph Attention Transformer Encoder and a Large Scale Dataset for Indian Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[23daf222365761841808ac1f307679ec2bdf31f3]] — Turkish Sign Language Recognition Through Self-Supervised Learning Features and Heatmap (2025)
- [[63eea5048d8a6f1f2163f07e5bd8f3e950a0a08f]] — Logos as a Well-Tempered Pre-train for Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[677aba852979dff364b925dfdba51cb9f03b37b7]] — KuSL2023: A standard for Kurdish sign language detection and classification using hand tracking and machine learning (2025)
- [[5c724aa0a950fa11b8ff348b4ae135e350832dff]] — Survey on Hand Gesture Recognition From Visual Input (2025)
- [[08859a0bad6df7e8af4edfd16091aefc110cf881]] — VR Applications and Vision-Based Recognition Techniques for Sign Language: A Survey (2024)
- [[08aee6390d06e6f273dcd474749eaa88c1ccb901]] — AzSLD: Azerbaijani sign language dataset for fingerspelling, word, and sentence translation with baseline software (2024)
- [[382c11d78cc85ed2f3239bb020273bcdddfa8af9]] — MM-WLAuslan: Multi-View Multi-Modal Word-Level Australian Sign Language Recognition Dataset (2024)
- [[fecd1aca44a468d7ca2993abe4d9ee1de002e9b6]] — A Chinese Continuous Sign Language Dataset Based on Complex Environments (2024)
- [[a70cd8ac6b2d220ec3d64ecbab3828f04a14d229]] — Impact of face swapping and data augmentation on sign language recognition (2024)
- [[8e2ddf73ae7b00ee25dc67a72355359ec2ef78b2]] — Hierarchical Windowed Graph Attention Network and a Large Scale Dataset for Isolated Indian Sign Language Recognition (2024)
- [[2c41ef36c6ba268a0e3c39594cc7d103387f2fed]] — SynthSL: Expressive Humans for Sign Language Image Synthesis (2024)
- [[209238c90b24079b29a3580aa68338fb49c55313]] — Hand Graph Topology Selection for Skeleton-Based Sign Language Recognition (2024)
- [[40451e5f492d9b72395740f33cd79867d7dd88eb]] — Towards Better Communication: Refining Hand Pose Estimation in Low-Resolution Sign Language Videos (2024)
- [[2e57596f8058f4f528d741d326f74d76feaa3c41]] — Isolated sign language recognition through integrating pose data and motion history images (2024)
- [[b664b52b16adb8321314990b0cb1d4d1c4cb12e1]] — E-TSL: A Continuous Educational Turkish Sign Language Dataset with Baseline Methods (2024)
- [[8276ab55419fba3b99e68a4907611a6e117bf3f4]] — SkelCap: Automated Generation of Descriptive Text from Skeleton Keypoint Sequences (2024)
- [[eabce17185aa25bdd86d675f8958d7cfabe3938b]] — A Hong Kong Sign Language Corpus Collected from Sign-interpreted TV News (2024)
- [[2ddcdecc162c35b404697c76c3516d93eb105ada]] — Retrospective of Kazakh-Russian Sign Language Corpus Formation (2024)
- [[014bbb6a6e2f0c6ef7c96e21875ddc8066547ba7]] — Multi-Stream Isolated Sign Language Recognition Based on Finger Features Derived from Pose Data (2024)
- [[be750a466fb5db670c3d4e99616a0b6c28fe267d]] — Transfer Learning for Cross-Dataset Isolated Sign Language Recognition in Under-Resourced Datasets (2024)
- [[2a60ea36fd8d9c95a745c4fb0d0c4607746ca0d7]] — Unraveling a Decade: A Comprehensive Survey on Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[921269a631d69c8a1dcf46c432e7b9b2936a2863]] — A New Dataset for End-to-End Sign Language Translation: The Greek Elementary School Dataset (2023)
- [[8f5f34dd6fc93ce1def39b403d6ec22966df5a12]] — Sign Language Recognition: Current State of Knowledge and Future Directions (2023)
- [[a2281ac3d03ef2c795a9460e07647a0478d15a37]] — Alabib-65: A Realistic Dataset for Algerian Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[dc71677e882665f649a92544da40ba9c81e16fc2]] — Multi-cue temporal modeling for skeleton-based sign language recognition (2023)
- [[f5f0001852624f5b1086ba38f037db3ca9d67429]] — SynLibras: A Disentangled Deep Generative Model for Brazilian Sign Language Synthesis (2022)
- [[20501b5eecaa887570cec69cd41bcde8919ffef3]] — Attention Modeling with Temporal Shift in Sign Language Recognition (2022)
- [[6436727f56f247eb04b9ada69d8132215c7df418]] — A Comprehensive Review of Sign Language Recognition: Different Types, Modalities, and Datasets (2022)
- [[3826b47d3e8a7ef99d8c757c778e7d11633df84e]] — BBC-Oxford British Sign Language Dataset (2021)
- [[4661b8373ad6de37124854c39e0d88839ca31c15]] — Using Motion History Images With 3D Convolutional Networks in Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[fc830bd949cef153c343fda1c16c425f9bc48888]] — Towards Hybrid Multimodal Manual and Non-Manual Arabic Sign Language Recognition: mArSL Database and Pilot Study (2021)
- [[591a11dedfb9190ec66b3cd45c67cee824187a6d]] — Score-level Multi Cue Fusion for Sign Language Recognition (2020)
- [[5b8ec500aedc97cc9874a9eb601cef37c5f38e3f]] — Quantitative Survey of the State of the Art in Sign Language Recognition (2020)
- [[14cc503211af3ba271e0ebee622e0439c693793f]] — AUTSL: A Large Scale Multi-Modal Turkish Sign Language Dataset and Baseline Methods (2020)
- [[eee1f792b550e20c1b0f30219848c61caf9d3f12]] — MUDRAKSHARA - A Voice for Deaf/Dumb People (2020)
- [[41a124d483bc6b8984bbb8fba20b569f639d64a6]] — PopSign ASL v1.0: An Isolated American Sign Language Dataset Collected via Smartphones (2023)
- [[ecdaafdcd021793301430845ca5cbeb1e6a64fc5]] — Addressing Resource Scarcity across Sign Languages with Multilingual Pretraining and Unified-Vocabulary Datasets (2022)
- [[f04d5de9c2970e0a3d8ab9baef63bbcee67646e2]] — SLRTP 2020: The Sign Language Recognition, Translation & Production Workshop (2020)
- [[128f90d72c91ed52c9db5f3adbf76941b76af658]] — Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences Sciences ()
- [[1b658918255851a0d13210de571670a7fb4a5584]] — Expert Systems With Applications ()
- [[16f3447d8e0ad85a96c630b69552edae272b0c05]] — Data in Brief ()

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: ar5iv
- bibtex: ours
