---
semanticScholarId: "edf9cb9dd5282f4e49217b181a58655073ddd5e1"
bibKey: "pose:kigure2021application"
year: 2021
title: "Application of Video-to-Video Translation Networks to Computational Fluid Dynamics"
doi: "10.3389/frai.2021.670208"
arxivId: "2109.10679"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: false
topics: ["Computer Science", "Physics", "Medicine", "Engineering"]
fullText: "none"
fullTextSource: "none"
bibtexSource: "ours"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: none
  citations: none
  fullText: none
  bibtex: ours
---

# Application of Video-to-Video Translation Networks to Computational Fluid Dynamics

**Year:** [[2021]]
**Topics:** [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]], [[topics/physics|Physics]], [[topics/medicine|Medicine]], [[topics/engineering|Engineering]]
**Authors:** Hiromitsu Kigure

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edf9cb9dd5282f4e49217b181a58655073ddd5e1)
- [PDF](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frai.2021.670208/pdf)
- [arXiv:2109.10679](https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.10679)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2021.670208)

## Abstract

In recent years, the evolution of artificial intelligence, especially deep learning, has been remarkable, and its application to various fields has been growing rapidly. In this paper, I report the results of the application of generative adversarial networks (GANs), specifically video-to-video translation networks, to computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. The purpose of this research is to reduce the computational cost of CFD simulations with GANs. The architecture of GANs in this research is a combination of the image-to-image translation networks (the so-called “pix2pix”) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). It is shown that the results of high-cost and high-accuracy simulations (with high-resolution computational grids) can be estimated from those of low-cost and low-accuracy simulations (with low-resolution grids). In particular, the time evolution of density distributions in the cases of a high-resolution grid is reproduced from that in the cases of a low-resolution grid through GANs, and the density inhomogeneity estimated from the image generated by GANs recovers the ground truth with good accuracy. Qualitative and quantitative comparisons of the results of the proposed method with those of several super-resolution algorithms are also presented.

## TL;DR

The results of the application of generative adversarial networks (GANs), specifically video-to-video translation networks, to computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations are reported to reduce the computational cost of CFD simulations with GANs.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@article{pose:kigure2021application,
 author = {Kigure, Hiromitsu},
 journal = {Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence},
 pages = {670208},
 publisher = {Frontiers Media SA},
 title = {Application of Video-to-Video Translation Networks to Computational Fluid Dynamics},
 volume = {4},
 year = {2021}
}
```

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: none
- citations: none
- fullText: none
- bibtex: ours
