---
semanticScholarId: "fe6c2b21f6086c375f4e211efb6c4d6479d54f01"
bibKey: null
year: 2020
title: "BSL-1K: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition using mouthing cues"
doi: "10.1007/978-3-030-58621-8_3"
arxivId: "2007.12131"
isSignLanguage: true
expanded: true
topics: ["Psychology", "Computer Science"]
fullText: "extracted"
fullTextSource: "ar5iv"
bibtexSource: "semanticscholar"
sources:
  title: semanticscholar
  abstract: semanticscholar
  authors: semanticscholar
  topics: semanticscholar
  references: semanticscholar
  citations: semanticscholar
  fullText: ar5iv
  bibtex: semanticscholar
---

# BSL-1K: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition using mouthing cues

**Year:** [[2020]]
**Topics:** [[topics/psychology|Psychology]], [[topics/computer-science|Computer Science]]
**Authors:** Samuel Albanie; Gül Varol; Liliane Momeni; Triantafyllos Afouras; Joon Son Chung; Neil Fox; Andrew Zisserman

## Links
- [Semantic Scholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fe6c2b21f6086c375f4e211efb6c4d6479d54f01)
- [arXiv:2007.12131](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.12131)
- [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58621-8_3)

## Abstract

Recent progress in fine-grained gesture and action classification, and machine translation, point to the possibility of automated sign language recognition becoming a reality. A key stumbling block in making progress towards this goal is a lack of appropriate training data, stemming from the high complexity of sign annotation and a limited supply of qualified annotators. In this work, we introduce a new scalable approach to data collection for sign recognition in continuous videos. We make use of weakly-aligned subtitles for broadcast footage together with a keyword spotting method to automatically localise sign-instances for a vocabulary of 1,000 signs in 1,000 hours of video. We make the following contributions: (1) We show how to use mouthing cues from signers to obtain high-quality annotations from video data - the result is the BSL-1K dataset, a collection of British Sign Language (BSL) signs of unprecedented scale; (2) We show that we can use BSL-1K to train strong sign recognition models for co-articulated signs in BSL and that these models additionally form excellent pretraining for other sign languages and benchmarks - we exceed the state of the art on both the MSASL and WLASL benchmarks. Finally, (3) we propose new large-scale evaluation sets for the tasks of sign recognition and sign spotting and provide baselines which we hope will serve to stimulate research in this area.

## TL;DR

A new scalable approach to data collection for sign recognition in continuous videos is introduced, and it is shown that BSL-1K can be used to train strong sign recognition models for co-articulated signs in BSL and that these models additionally form excellent pretraining for other sign languages and benchmarks.

## BibTeX

```bibtex
@Article{Albanie2020BSL1KSU,
 author = {Samuel Albanie and Gül Varol and Liliane Momeni and Triantafyllos Afouras and Joon Son Chung and Neil Fox and Andrew Zisserman},
 booktitle = {European Conference on Computer Vision},
 journal = {ArXiv},
 title = {BSL-1K: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition using mouthing cues},
 volume = {abs/2007.12131},
 year = {2020}
}
```

## Full Text

# BSL-1K: Scaling up co-articulated sign language recognition using mouthing cues

Samuel Albanie 1 Equal contribution Gül Varol 1 † † footnotemark: Liliane Momeni 1 Triantafyllos Afouras 1 Joon Son Chung 1 Neil Fox 2 Andrew Zisserman 1

###### Abstract

Recent progress in fine-grained gesture and action classification, and machine translation, point to the possibility of automated sign language

recognition becoming a reality. A key stumbling block in making progress towards this goal is a lack of

appropriate training data, stemming from the high complexity of sign annotation and a limited supply of qualified annotators.

In this work,

we introduce a new scalable approach to data collection for sign recognition in continuous videos.

We make use of weakly-aligned subtitles for broadcast footage together with a keyword spotting method

to automatically localise sign-instances for a vocabulary of 1,000 signs in 1,000 hours of video.

We make the following contributions: (1) We show how to use mouthing cues from signers to obtain high-quality annotations from video data-the result is the BSL-1K dataset, a collection of British Sign Language (BSL) signs of unprecedented scale;

(2) We show that we can use BSL-1K to train strong sign recognition models for co-articulated signs in BSL and that these models additionally form excellent pretraining for other sign languages and benchmarks-we exceed the state of the art on both the MSASL and WLASL benchmarks. Finally, (3) we propose new large-scale evaluation sets for the tasks of sign recognition and sign spotting and provide baselines which we hope will serve to stimulate research in this area.

###### Keywords:

Sign Language Recognition, Visual Keyword Spotting

## 1 Introduction

With the continual increase in the performance of human action recognition there has been a renewed interest in

the challenge of recognising sign languages such as American Sign Language (ASL),

British Sign Language (BSL), and Chinese Sign Language (CSL).

Although in the past isolated sign recognition has seen some progress, recognition of continuous sign language

remains extremely challenging [

[10](#bib.bib10) ] . Isolated signs, as in dictionary examples, do not suffer from the naturally occurring

complication of co-articulation (i.e. transition motions) between preceding and subsequent signs, making

them visually very different from continuous signing. If we are to recognise ASL

and BSL performed naturally by signers, then we need to recognise co-articulated

signs.

Similar problems were faced by Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and the solution, as always, was to learn from very

large scale datasets, using a parallel corpus of speech and text.

In the vision community, a related path was taken with the modern development of automatic lip

reading: first isolated words were recognised [

[16](#bib.bib16) ] , and later sentences were recognised [ [15](#bib.bib15) ] -in both cases tied to the release of

large datasets.

The objective of this paper is to design a scalable method to generate large-scale datasets of continuous signing,

for training and testing sign

language recognition, and we demonstrate this for BSL. We start from the perhaps counter-intuitive observation that signers often mouth the word they sign simultaneously, as an additional signal [

[5](#bib.bib5) , [56](#bib.bib56) , [55](#bib.bib55) ] , performing similar lip movements as for the spoken word. This differs from mouth gestures which are not derived from the spoken language [ [21](#bib.bib21) ] . The mouthing helps disambiguate between different meanings of the same manual sign [ [62](#bib.bib62) ] or in some cases simply provides redundancy. In this way, a sign is not only defined by the hand movements and hand shapes, but also by facial expressions and mouth movements [ [20](#bib.bib20) ] .

We harness word mouthings to provide a method of automatically

annotating continuous signing. The key idea is to exploit the readily available

and abundant supply of sign-language translated TV broadcasts that consist of an overlaid interpreter performing signs and subtitles that correspond to the audio content. The availability of subtitles means that the annotation task is in essence one of alignment between the words in the subtitle and the mouthings of the overlaid signer. Nevertheless, this is a very challenging task: a continuous sign may last for only a fraction (e.g. 0.5) of a second, whilst the subtitles may last for several seconds and are not synchronised with the signs produced by the signer; the word order of the English need not be the same as the word order of the sign language; the sign may not be mouthed; and furthermore, words may not be signed or may be signed in different ways depending on the context.

For example, the word "fish" has a different visual sign depending on referring to the animal or the food, introducing

additional challenges when associating subtitle words to signs.

To detect the mouthings we use visual keyword spotting -the task of determining whether and when a keyword of interest is uttered by a talking face using only visual information-to address the alignment problem described above. Two factors motivate its use: (1) direct lip reading of arbitrary isolated mouthings is a fundamentally difficult task, but searching for a particular known word within a short temporal window is considerably less challenging; (2) the recent availability of large scale video datasets with aligned audio transcriptions [ [1](#bib.bib1) , [17](#bib.bib17) ] now allows for the training of powerful visual keyword spotting models [ [53](#bib.bib53) , [64](#bib.bib64) , [33](#bib.bib33) ] that, as we show in the experiments, work well for this application.

We make the following contributions: (1) we show how to use visual

keyword spotting to recognise the mouthing cues from signers to obtain

high-quality annotations from video data-the result is the BSL-1K dataset, a large-scale collection of BSL

(British Sign Language) signs with a 1K sign vocabulary; (2) We show the

value of BSL-1K by using it to train strong sign recognition

models for co-articulated signs in BSL and demonstrate that these

models additionally form excellent pretraining for other sign

languages and benchmarks-we exceed the state of the art on both the

MSASL and WLASL benchmarks with this approach; (3) We propose new

evaluation datasets for sign recognition and sign

spotting and provide baselines for each of these tasks to provide a

foundation for future research

1 1 1 The project page is at: [https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/bsl1k/](https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/bsl1k/) .

## 2 Related Work

Sign language datasets. We begin by briefly reviewing public benchmarks for

studying automatic sign language recognition.

Several benchmarks have been proposed for

American [

[4](#bib.bib4) , [34](#bib.bib34) , [40](#bib.bib40) , [61](#bib.bib61) ] ,

German [

[35](#bib.bib35) , [60](#bib.bib60) ] ,

Chinese [

[14](#bib.bib14) , [32](#bib.bib32) ] , and

Finnish [

[59](#bib.bib59) ] sign languages.

BSL datasets, on the other hand,

are scarce. One exception is the ongoing development of the linguistic

corpus [

[51](#bib.bib51) , [52](#bib.bib52) ] which provides fine-grained

annotations for the atomic elements of sign production.

Whilst its high annotation quality provides an excellent

resource for sign linguists, the annotations span only

a fraction of the source videos so it is less appropriate

for training current state-of-the-art data-hungry computer vision pipelines.

Tab. [1](#S2.T1) presents an overview of publicly

available datasets, grouped according to their provision of isolated signs

or co-articulated signs.

Earlier datasets have been limited in the size of their video

instances, vocabularies, and signers.

Within the isolated sign datasets,

Purdue RVL-SLLL [

[61](#bib.bib61) ] has a limited vocabulary of 104 signs

(ASL comprises more than 3K signs in total [

[58](#bib.bib58) ] ).

ASLLVD [

[4](#bib.bib4) ] has only 6 signers.

Recently, MSASL [

[34](#bib.bib34) ] and WLASL [ [40](#bib.bib40) ] large-vocabulary isolated sign datasets

have been released

with 1K and 2K signs, respectively.

The videos are collected from lexicon databases

and other instructional videos on the web.

Due to the difficulty of annotating co-articulated signs

in long videos,

continuous datasets have been limited in their vocabulary,

and most of them have been recorded in lab

settings [

[32](#bib.bib32) , [60](#bib.bib60) , [61](#bib.bib61) ] .

RWTH-Phoenix [

[35](#bib.bib35) ] is one of the few realistic

datasets that supports training complex models based on

deep neural networks.

A recent extension also allows studying sign language translation [

[10](#bib.bib10) ] .

However, the

videos in [

[10](#bib.bib10) , [35](#bib.bib35) ] are only from weather broadcasts,

restricting the domain of discourse.

In summary, the main constraints of the previous datasets are one or more of the following: (i) they are limited in size, (ii) they have a large total vocabulary but only of isolated signs, or (iii) they consist of natural co-articulated signs but cover a limited domain of discourse.

The BSL-1K dataset provides a considerably greater number of

annotations than all previous public sign language datasets,

and it does so in the co-articulated setting for a large domain of discourse.

Sign language recognition. Early work on sign language recognition

focused on hand-crafted features

computed for hand shape and motion [

[24](#bib.bib24) , [25](#bib.bib25) , [54](#bib.bib54) , [57](#bib.bib57) ] .

Upper body and hand pose have then

been widely used as part of the recognition

pipelines [

[7](#bib.bib7) , [9](#bib.bib9) , [19](#bib.bib19) , [48](#bib.bib48) , [50](#bib.bib50) ] .

Non-manual features such as

face [

[24](#bib.bib24) , [35](#bib.bib35) , [47](#bib.bib47) ] ,

and mouth [

[3](#bib.bib3) , [36](#bib.bib36) , [38](#bib.bib38) ] shapes are relatively less considered.

For sequence modelling of signs, HMMs [

[23](#bib.bib23) , [2](#bib.bib2) , [27](#bib.bib27) , [54](#bib.bib54) ] , and

more recently LSTMs [

[9](#bib.bib9) , [32](#bib.bib32) , [65](#bib.bib65) , [67](#bib.bib67) ] ,

have been utilised.

Koller et al. [

[39](#bib.bib39) ] present a hybrid approach based on CNN-RNN-HMM

to iteratively re-align sign language videos to the sequence of sign annotations.

More recently 3D CNNs have been adopted due to

their representation capacity for spatio-temporal

data [

[6](#bib.bib6) , [8](#bib.bib8) , [31](#bib.bib31) , [34](#bib.bib34) , [40](#bib.bib40) ] .

Two recent concurrent works [

[34](#bib.bib34) , [40](#bib.bib40) ] showed that I3D models [ [13](#bib.bib13) ] significantly outperform

their pose-based counterparts.

In this paper, we confirm the success of I3D models,

while also showing improvements using pose distillation as pretraining.

There have been efforts to use sequence-to-sequence translation models for

sign language translation [

[10](#bib.bib10) ] , though this has been limited to the weather discourse of RWTH-Phoenix,

and the method is limited by the size of the training set. The recent work of [

[41](#bib.bib41) ] localises signs in continuous news footage to improve an isolated sign classifier.

In this work, we utilise mouthings to localise signs in weakly-supervised videos.

Previous work [

[7](#bib.bib7) , [18](#bib.bib18) , [50](#bib.bib50) , [17](#bib.bib17) ] has used weakly aligned subtitles

as a source of training data, and both one-shot [

[50](#bib.bib50) ] (from a visual dictionary) and zero-shot [ [6](#bib.bib6) ] (from a textual description) have also

been used. Though no previous work, to our knowledge, has put these ideas together.

The sign spotting problem was formulated in [

[22](#bib.bib22) , [59](#bib.bib59) ] .

Using the mouth patterns. The mouth has several roles in sign language that can be grouped into

spoken components (mouthings) and oral components (mouth gestures) [

[62](#bib.bib62) ] .

Several works focus on recognising mouth shapes [

[3](#bib.bib3) , [38](#bib.bib38) ] to recover mouth gestures.

Few works [

[36](#bib.bib36) , [37](#bib.bib37) ] attempt to recognise mouthings in sign language data by focusing on a few categories of

visemes, i.e., visual correspondences

of phonemes in the lip region [

[26](#bib.bib26) ] .

Most closely related to our

work, [

[49](#bib.bib49) ] similarly searches subtitles of broadcast footage

and uses the mouth as a cue to improve alignment between the subtitles and the

signing. Two key differences between our work and theirs are: (1) we achieve

precise localisation through keyword spotting, whereas they only use an open/closed

mouth classifier to reduce the number of candidates for a given sign; (2)

scale-we gather signs over 1,000 hours of signing (in contrast to the 30

hours considered in [

[49](#bib.bib49) ] ).

## 3 Learning Sign Recognition with Automatic Labels

In this section, we describe the process used to collect BSL-1K, a large-scale dataset of BSL signs. An overview of the approach is provided in Fig. [1](#S3.F1) . In Sec. [3.1](#S3.SS1) , we describe how large numbers of video clips that are likely to contain a given sign are sourced from public broadcast footage using subtitles; in Sec. [3.2](#S3.SS2) , we show how automatic keyword spotting can be used to precisely localise specific signs to within a fraction of a second; in Sec. [3.3](#S3.SS3) , we apply this technique to efficiently annotate a large-scale dataset with a vocabulary of 1K signs.

Figure 1: Keyword-driven sign annotation: (Left, the annotation pipeline): Stage 1: for a given target sign (e.g. "happy") each occurrence of the word in the subtitles provides a candidate temporal window when the sign may occur (this is further padded by several seconds on either side to account for misalignment of subtitles and signs); Stage 2: a keyword spotter uses the mouthing of the signer to perform precise localisation of the sign within this window. (Right): Examples from the BSL-1K dataset-produced by applying keyword spotting for a vocabulary of 1K words.

<!-- image -->

### 3.1 Finding probable signing windows in public broadcast footage

The source material for the dataset comprises 1,412 episodes of publicly broadcast TV programs produced by the BBC which contains 1,060 hours of continuous BSL signing. The episodes cover a wide range of topics: medical dramas, history and nature documentaries,

cooking shows and programs covering gardening, business and travel. The signing represents a translation (rather than a transcription) of the content and is produced by a total of forty professional BSL interpreters. The signer occupies a fixed region of the screen and is cropped directly from the footage. A full list of the TV shows that form BSL-1K can be found in

Appendix

[0.C.2](#Pt0.A3.SS2) .

In addition to videos, these episodes are accompanied by subtitles (numbering approximately 9.5 million words in total). To locate temporal windows in which instances of signs are likely to occur within the source footage, we first identify a candidate list of words that: (i) are present in the subtitles; (ii) have entries in both BSL

signbank

2 2 2 [https://bslsignbank.ucl.ac.uk/](https://bslsignbank.ucl.ac.uk/) and sign BSL 3 3 3 [https://www.signbsl.com/](https://www.signbsl.com/) , two online dictionaries of isolated signs (to ensure that we query words that have valid mappings to signs). The result is an initial vocabulary of 1,350 words, which are used as queries for the keyword spotting model to perform sign localisation-this process is described next.

### 3.2 Precise sign localisation through visual keyword spotting

By searching the content of the subtitle tracks for instances of words in the initial vocabulary, we obtain a set of candidate temporal windows in which instances of signs may occur. However, two factors render these temporal proposals extremely noisy: (1) the presence of a word in the subtitles does not guarantee its presence in the signing; (2) even for subtitled words that are signed, we find through inspection that their appearance in the subtitles can be misaligned with the sign itself by several seconds.

To address this challenge, we turn to visual keyword spotting . Our goal is to detect and precisely localise the presence of a sign by identifying its \say spoken components [ [56](#bib.bib56) ] within a temporal sequence of mouthing patterns. Two hypotheses underpin this approach: (a) that mouthing provides a strong localisation signal for signs as they are produced; (b) that this mouthing occurs with sufficient frequency to form a useful localisation cue. Our method is motivated by studies in the Sign Linguistics literature which find that spoken components frequently serve to identify signs-this occurs most prominently when the mouth pattern is used to distinguish between manual homonyms 4 4 4 These are signs that use identical hand movements (e.g. \say king and \say queen) whose meanings are distinguished by mouthings. (see [ [56](#bib.bib56) ] for a detailed discussion). However, even if these hypotheses hold, the task remains extremely challenging-signers typically do not mouth continuously and the mouthings that are produced may only correspond to a portion of the word [ [56](#bib.bib56) ] . For this reason, existing lip reading approaches cannot be used directly (indeed, an initial exploratory experiment we conducted with the state-of-the-art lip reading model of [ [1](#bib.bib1) ] achieved zero recall on five-hundred randomly sampled sentences of signer mouthings from the BBC source footage).

The key to the effectiveness of visual keyword spotting is that rather than solving the general problem of lip reading, it solves the much easier problem of identifying a single token from a small collection of candidates within a short temporal window. In this work, we use the subtitles to construct such windows. The pipeline for automatic sign annotations therefore consists of two stages (Fig. [1](#S3.F1) , left): (1) For a given target sign e.g. "happy", determine the times of all occurrences of this sign in the subtitles accompanying the video footage. The subtitle time provides a short window during which the word was spoken, but not necessarily when its corresponding sign is produced in the translation. We therefore extend this candidate window by several seconds to increase the likelihood that the sign is present in the sequence. We include ablations to assess the influence of this padding process in Sec. [5](#S5) and determine empirically that padding by four seconds on each side of the subtitle represents a good choice. (2) The resulting temporal window is then provided, together with the target word, to a keyword spotting model (described in detail in Sec. [4.1](#S4.SS1) ) which estimates the probability that the sign was mouthed at each time step (we apply the keyword spotter with a stride of 0.04 0.04 0.04 seconds-this choice is motivated by the fact that the source footage has a frame rate of 25fps). When the keyword spotter asserts with high confidence that it has located a sign, we take the location of the peak posterior probability as an anchoring point for one endpoint of a 0.6 second window (this value was determined by visual inspection to be sufficient for capturing individual signs). The peak probability is then converted into a decision about whether a sign is present using a threshold parameter. To build the BSL-1K dataset, we select a value of 0.5 for this parameter after conducting experiments (reported in Tab. [3](#S5.T3) ) to assess its influence on the downstream task of sign recognition performance.

Figure 2: BSL-1K sign frequencies: Log-histogram of instance counts for the 1,064 words constituting the BSL-1K vocabulary, together with example signs. The long-tail distribution reflects the real setting in which some signs are more frequent than others.

<!-- image -->

### 3.3 BSL-1K dataset construction and validation

Following the sign localisation process described above, we obtain approximately 280k localised signs from a set of 2.4 million candidate subtitles. To ensure that the dataset supports study of signer-independent sign recognition, we then compute face embeddings (using an SENet-50 [ [30](#bib.bib30) ] architecture trained for verification on the VGGFace2 dataset [ [11](#bib.bib11) ] ) to group the episodes according to which of the forty signers they were translated by. We partition the data into three splits, assigning thirty-two signers for training, four signers for validation and four signers for testing. We further sought to include an equal number of hearing and non-hearing signers (the validation and test sets both contain an equal number of each, the training set is approximately balanced with 13 hearing, 17 non-hearing and 2 signers whose deafness is unknown).

We then perform a further filtering step on the vocabulary to ensure that each word included in the dataset is represented with high confidence (at least one instance with confidence 0.8) in the training partition, which produces a final dataset vocabulary of 1,064 words (see Fig.

[2](#S3.F2) for the distribution and

Appendix

[0.C.3](#Pt0.A3.SS3) for the full word list).

Validating the automatic annotation pipeline. One of the key hypotheses underpinning this work is that keyword spotting is capable of correctly locating signs. We first verify this hypothesis by presenting a randomly sampled subset of the test partition to a native BSL signer, who was asked to assess whether the short temporal windows produced by the keyword spotting model with high confidence (each 0.6 seconds in duration) contained correct instances of the target sign. A screenshot of the annotation tool developed for this task is provided in

Fig.

[A.4](#Pt0.A3.F4) .

A total of 1k signs were included in this initial assessment, of which 70% were marked as correct, 28% were marked as incorrect and 2% were marked as uncertain, validating the key idea behind the annotation pipeline.

Possible reasons for incorrect marks include:

BSL mouthing patterns are not always identical to

spoken English and mouthings many times do not represent the full word

(e.g., "fsh" for "finish") [

[56](#bib.bib56) ] .

Constructing a manually verified test set. To construct a high quality, human verified test set and to maximise yield from the annotators, we started from a collection of sign predictions where the keyword model was highly confident (assigning a peak probability of greater than 0.9) yielding 5,826 sign predictions. Then, in addition to the validated 980 signs (corrections were provided as labels for the signs marked as incorrect and uncertain signs were removed), we further expanded the verified test set with non-native (BSL level 2 or above) signers who annotated a further 2k signs. We found that signers with lower levels of fluency were able to confidently assert that a sign was correct for a portion of the signs (at a rate of around 60%), but also annotated a large number of signs as "unsure", making it challenging to use these annotations as part of the validation test for the effectiveness of the pipeline. Only signs marked as correct were included into the final verified test set, which ultimately comprised 2,103 annotations covering 334 signs from the 1,064 sign vocabulary. The statistics of each partition of the dataset are provided in Tab. [2](#S3.T2) . All experimental test set results in this paper refer to performance on the verified test set (but we retain the full automatic test set, which we found to be useful for development).

In addition to the keyword spotting approach described above, we explore techniques for further dataset expansion based on other cues in

Appendix

[0.A.7](#Pt0.A1.SS7) .

## 4 Models and Implementation Details

In this section, we first describe the visual keyword spotting model used to collect signs from mouthings (Sec. [4.1](#S4.SS1) ). Next, we provide details of

the model architecture for sign recognition and spotting (Sec.

[4.2](#S4.SS2) ). Lastly, we describe a method for obtaining a good initialisation for the sign recognition model (Sec. [4.3](#S4.SS3) ).

### 4.1 Visual keyword spotting model

We use the improved visual-only keyword spotting model of Stafylakis et al. [ [53](#bib.bib53) ] from [ [46](#bib.bib46) ] (referred to in their paper as "P2G [ [53](#bib.bib53) ] baseline"), provided by the authors. The model of [ [53](#bib.bib53) ] combines visual features with a fixed-length keyword embedding to determine whether a user-defined keyword is present in an input video clip. The performance of [ [53](#bib.bib53) ] is improved in [ [46](#bib.bib46) ] by switching the keyword encoder-decoder from grapheme-to-phoneme (G2P) to phoneme-to-grapheme (P2G).

In more detail, the model consists of four stages: (i) visual features are first extracted from the sequence of face-cropped image frames from a clip (this is performed using a 512 × 512 512 512 512\times 512 SSD architecture [ [43](#bib.bib43) ] trained for face detection on WIDER faces [ [63](#bib.bib63) ] ), (ii) a fixed-length keyword representation is built using a P2G encoder-decoder, (iii) the visual and keyword embeddings are concatenated and passed through BiLSTMs, (iv) finally, a sigmoid activation is applied on the output to approximate the posterior probability that the keyword occurs in the video clip for each input frame. If the maximum posterior over all frames is greater than a threshold, the clip is predicted to contain the keyword. The predicted location of the keyword is the position of the maximum posterior. Finally, non-maximum suppression is run with a temporal window of 0.6 seconds over the untrimmed source videos to remove duplicates.

### 4.2 Sign recognition model

We employ a spatio-temporal convolutional neural network

architecture that takes a multiple-frame video as input,

and outputs class probabilities over sign categories.

Specifically, we follow the I3D architecture [

[13](#bib.bib13) ] due to its success on action recognition benchmarks, as well

as its recently observed success on sign recognition

datasets [

[34](#bib.bib34) , [40](#bib.bib40) ] .

To retain computational efficiency, we only use an RGB stream.

The model is trained on 16-frame consecutive frames (i.e., 0.64 sec for 25fps),

as [

[7](#bib.bib7) , [49](#bib.bib49) , [59](#bib.bib59) ] observed that co-articulated signs last roughly for 13 frames.

We resize our videos to have a spatial resolution of 224 × 224 224 224 224\times 224 .

For training, we randomly subsample a fixed-size, temporally contiguous input from the spatio-temporal volume

to have 16 × 224 × 224 16 224 224 16\times 224\times 224 resolution

in terms of number of frames, width, and height, respectively.

We minimise the cross-entropy loss using SGD with momentum (0.9)

with mini-batches of size 4, and an initial learning rate of 10 − 2 superscript 10 2 10^{-2} with a fixed schedule. The learning rate is decreased twice with a factor of 10 − 1 superscript 10 1 10^{-1} at epochs 20 and 40. We train for 50 epochs. Colour, scale, and horizontal flip

augmentations are applied on the input video.

When pretraining is used (e.g. on Kinetics-400 [

[13](#bib.bib13) ] or on other data where specified), we replace the last linear layer with the dimensionality of our classes, and fine-tune all network parameters (we observed that freezing part of the model is suboptimal). Finally, we apply dropout on the classification layer with a probability of 0.5.

At test time, we perform centre-cropping and apply a sliding window

with a stride of 8 frames before averaging the classification scores to obtain a video-level

prediction.

### 4.3 Video pose distillation

Given the significant focus on pose estimation in the sign

language recognition literature, we investigate how explicit pose modelling

can be used to improve the I3D model. To this end, we define a pose distillation network that takes in a sequence of 16 consecutive frames, but rather than predicting sign categories, the 1024-dimensional (following average pooling) embedding produced by the network is used to regress the poses of individuals appearing in each of the frames of its input. In more detail, we assume a single individual per-frame (as is the case in cropped sign translation footage) and task the network with predicting 130 human pose keypoints (18 body, 21 per hand, and 70 facial) produced by an OpenPose [

[12](#bib.bib12) ] model (trained on COCO [ [42](#bib.bib42) ] ) that is evaluated per-frame. The key idea is that, in order to effectively predict pose across multiple frames from a single video embedding, the model is encouraged to encode information not only about pose, but also descriptions of relevant dynamic gestures. The model is trained on a portion of the BSL-1K training set (due to space constraints, further details of the model architecture and training procedure are provided in

Appendix

[0.B](#Pt0.A2) ).

## 5 Experiments

We first provide several ablations on our sign recognition

model to answer questions such as which cues are important,

and how to best use human pose.

Then, we present baseline results for sign recognition and sign spotting,

with our best model.

Finally, we compare to the state of the art on ASL benchmarks

to illustrate the benefits of pretraining on our data.

### 5.1 Ablations for the sign recognition model

In this section, we evaluate our sign language recognition approach

and investigate (i) the effect of mouthing score threshold, (ii) the comparison to pose-based approaches,

(iii) the contribution of multi-modal cues, and

(iv) the video pose distillation.

Additional ablations about the influence of

the search window size for the keyword spotting (Appendix

[0.A.2](#Pt0.A1.SS2) )

and

the temporal extent of the automatic annotations (Appendix

[0.A.3](#Pt0.A1.SS3) )

can be found in

the appendix.

Evaluation metrics. Following [ [34](#bib.bib34) , [40](#bib.bib40) ] , we report

both top-1 and top-5 classification accuracy,

mainly due to ambiguities in signs which can be resolved

in context.

Furthermore, we adopt both per-instance and per-class

accuracy metrics. Per-instance accuracy is computed over all

test instances. Per-class accuracy refers to the average over the

sign categories present in the test set.

We use this metric due to the unbalanced nature of the datasets.

The effect of the mouthing score threshold. The keyword spotting method, being a binary classification model,

provides a confidence score, which we threshold to obtain

our

automatically annotated video clips. Reducing this threshold yields an increased number of sign instances at the cost of a potentially noisier set of annotations.

We denote the training set defined by a mouthing threshold 0.8

as BSL-1K

m.8 .

In Tab.

[3](#S5.T3) ,

we show the effect of changing this hyper-parameter

between a low- and high-confidence model with 0.5 and 0.8 mouthing

thresholds, respectively.

The larger set of training samples obtained with a threshold of 0.5 provide the best performance.

For the remaining ablations, we use the smaller BSL-1K

m.8 training

set for faster iterations, and return to the larger BSL-1K

m.5 set for training the final model.

Pose-based model versus I3D. We next verify that I3D is a suitable model for sign language recognition

by comparing it to a pose-based approach.

We implement Pose → → \rightarrow Sign, which

follows a 2D ResNet architecture [

[29](#bib.bib29) ] that

operates on 3 × 16 × P 3 16 𝑃 3\times 16\times P dimensional dynamic pose images,

where P 𝑃 P is the number of keypoints. In our experiments,

we use OpenPose [

[12](#bib.bib12) ] (pretrained on COCO [ [42](#bib.bib42) ] ) to extract

18 body, 21 per hand, and 70 facial keypoints. We use

16-frame inputs to make it comparable to the I3D counterpart.

We concatenate the estimated normalised x  y 𝑥 𝑦 xy coordinates of a keypoint with its

confidence score to obtain the 3 channels.

In Tab.

[4](#S5.T4) , we see that

I3D significantly outperforms the explicit 2D pose-based

method (65.57% vs 49.66% per-instance accuracy).

This conclusion is in accordance with the recent findings

of [

[34](#bib.bib34) , [40](#bib.bib40) ] .

Contribution of individual cues. We carry out two set of experiments to determine

how much our sign recognition model relies on signals from the

mouth and face region

versus the manual features from the body and hands:

(i) using Pose → → \rightarrow Sign, which takes as input

the 2D keypoint locations over several frames,

(ii) using I3D, which takes as input

raw video frames.

For the pose-based model, we train with only 70 facial keypoints,

60 body&amp;hand keypoints, or with the combination.

For I3D, we use the pose estimations to mask the pixels outside

of the face bounding box, to mask the mouth region, or

use all the pixels from the videos.

The results are summarised in Tab.

[4](#S5.T4) .

We observe that using only the face provides a strong baseline,

suggesting that mouthing is a strong cue for recognising signs,

e.g., 42.23% for I3D.

However, using all the cues, including body and hands (65.57%),

significantly outperforms using individual modalities.

Pretraining for sign recognition. Next we investigate different forms of pretraining for the I3D model. In Tab. [5](#S5.T5) , we compare the performance of a model trained with random initialisation (39.80%), fine-tuning from gesture recognition (46.93%), sign recognition (69.90%), and action recognition (69.00%). Video pose distillation provides a small boost over the other pretraining strategies (70.38%), suggesting that it is an effective way to force the I3D model to pay attention to the dynamics of the human keypoints, which is relevant for sign recognition.

### 5.2 Benchmarking sign recognition and sign spotting

Figure 3: Qualitative analysis: We present results of our sign recognition model on BSL-1K
for success (top) and failure (bottom) cases, together with their confidence scores
in parentheses.
To the right of each example, we show
a random training sample for the predicted sign (in small).
We observe that failure modes are commonly due to high visual similarity in the gesture (bottom-left)
and mouthing (bottom-right).

<!-- image -->

Next, we combine the parameter choices suggested by each of our ablations to establish baseline performances on the BSL-1K

dataset for two tasks: (i) sign recognition, (ii) sign spotting. Specifically,

the model

comprises an I3D architecture trained on BSL-1K

m.5 with pose-distillation as initialisation and random temporal offsets of up to 4 frames around the sign during training (the ablation studies for this temporal augmentation parameter are included in

Appendix

[0.A.3](#Pt0.A1.SS3) ).

The sign recognition evaluation protocol follows the experiments conducted in the ablations, the sign spotting protocol is described next.

Sign spotting. Differently from sign recognition, in which the objective is to classify a pre-defined temporal segment into a category from a given vocabulary, sign spotting aims to locate all instances of a particular sign within long sequences of untrimmed footage, enabling applications such as content-based search and efficient indexing of signing videos for which subtitles are not available. The evaluation protocol for assessing sign spotting on BSL-1K is defined as follows: for each sign category present amongst the human-verified test set annotations (334 in total), windows of 0.6-second centred on each verified instance are marked as positive and all other times within the subset of episodes that contain at least one instance of the sign are marked as negative. To avoid false penalties at signs that were not discovered by the automatic annotation process, we exclude windows of 8 seconds of footage centred at each location in the original footage at which the target keyword appears in the subtitles, but was not detected by the visual keyword spotting pipeline. In aggregate this corresponds to locating approximately one positive instance of a sign in every 1.5 hours of continuous signing negatives. A sign is considered to have been correctly spotted if its temporal overlap with the model prediction exceeds an IoU (intersection-over-union) of 0.5, and we report mean Average Precision (mAP) over the 334 sign classes as the metric for performance.

We report the performance of our strongest model for both the sign recognition and sign spotting benchmarks in Tab. [6](#S5.T6) . In Fig. [3](#S5.F3) , we provide some qualitative results from our sign recognition method and observe some modes of failure which are driven by strong visual similarity in sign production.

### 5.3 Comparison with the state of the art on ASL benchmarks

BSL-1K, being significantly larger than the recent WLASL [ [40](#bib.bib40) ] and MSASL [ [34](#bib.bib34) ] benchmarks, can be used for pretraining I3D models to provide strong

initialisation for other datasets. Here, we transfer the features from BSL to ASL,

which are two distinct sign languages.

As models from [ [34](#bib.bib34) ] were not publicly available,

we first reproduce the I3D Kinetics pretraining baseline with our implementation

to achieve fair comparisons. We use 64-frame inputs as isolated signs in these datasets are significantly

slower than co-articulated signs. We then train I3D from BSL-1K pretrained features.

Tab.

[7](#S5.T7) compares pretraining on Kinetics versus

our BSL-1K data. BSL-1K provides a significant boost

in the performance, outperforming the state-of-the-art results

(46.82% and 64.71% top-1 accuracy). Find additional details, as well

as similar experiments

on co-articulated datasets in

Appendix

[0.A.6](#Pt0.A1.SS6) .

## 6 Conclusion

We have demonstrated the advantages

of using visual keyword spotting to automatically

annotate continuous sign language videos

with weakly-aligned subtitles. We have

presented BSL-1K, a large-scale

dataset of co-articulated signs that,

coupled with a 3D CNN training, allows

high-performance

recognition of signs from a large-vocabulary.

Our model has further shown beneficial

as initialisation for ASL benchmarks.

Finally, we have provided ablations and baselines

for sign recognition

and sign spotting tasks. A potential future

direction is leveraging

our automatic annotations and recognition model

for sign language translation.

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by EPSRC grant ExTol. We also thank T. Stafylakis, A. Brown, A. Dutta, L. Dunbar, A. Thandavan, C. Camgoz, O. Koller, H. V. Joze, O. Kopuklu for their help.

## References

- [1] Afouras, T., Chung, J.S., Senior, A., Vinyals, O., Zisserman, A.: Deep audio-visual speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2019)
- [2] Agris, U., Zieren, J., Canzler, U., Bauer, B., Kraiss, K.F.: Recent developments in visual sign language recognition. Universal Access in the Information Society 6 , 323-362 (2008)
- [3] Antonakos, E., Roussos, A., Zafeiriou, S.: A survey on mouth modeling and analysis for sign language recognition. In: IEEE International Conference and Workshops on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (2015)
- [4] Athitsos, V., Neidle, C., Sclaroff, S., Nash, J., Stefan, A., Quan Yuan, Thangali, A.: The american sign language lexicon video dataset. In: CVPRW (2008)
- [5] Bank, R., Crasborn, O., Hout, R.: Variation in mouth actions with manual signs in sign language of the Netherlands (ngt). Sign Language &amp; Linguistics 14 , 248-270 (2011)
- [6] Bilge, Y.C., Ikizler, N., Cinbis, R.: Zero-shot sign language recognition: Can textual data uncover sign languages? In: BMVC (2019)
- [7] Buehler, P., Zisserman, A., Everingham, M.: Learning sign language by watching TV (using weakly aligned subtitles). In: CVPR (2009)
- [8] Camgoz, N.C., Hadfield, S., Koller, O., Bowden, R.: Using convolutional 3D neural networks for user-independent continuous gesture recognition. In: IEEE International Conference of Pattern Recognition, ChaLearn Workshop (2016)
- [9] Camgoz, N.C., Hadfield, S., Koller, O., Bowden, R.: SubUNets: End-to-end hand shape and continuous sign language recognition. In: ICCV (2017)
- [10] Camgoz, N.C., Hadfield, S., Koller, O., Ney, H., Bowden, R.: Neural sign language translation. In: CVPR (2018)
- [11] Cao, Q., Shen, L., Xie, W., Parkhi, O.M., Zisserman, A.: VGGFace2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and age. In: International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (2018)
- [12] Cao, Z., Hidalgo, G., Simon, T., Wei, S.E., Sheikh, Y.: OpenPose: realtime multi-person 2D pose estimation using Part Affinity Fields. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.08008 (2018)
- [13] Carreira, J., Zisserman, A.: Quo vadis, action recognition? A new model and the Kinetics dataset. In: CVPR (2017)
- [14] Chai, X., Wang, H., Chen, X.: The devisign large vocabulary of chinese sign language database and baseline evaluations. Technical report VIPL-TR-14-SLR-001. Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Institute of Computing Technology, CAS (2014)
- [15] Chung, J.S., Senior, A., Vinyals, O., Zisserman, A.: Lip reading sentences in the wild. In: CVPR (2017)
- [16] Chung, J.S., Zisserman, A.: Lip reading in the wild. In: ACCV (2016)
- [17] Chung, J.S., Zisserman, A.: Signs in time: Encoding human motion as a temporal image. In: Workshop on Brave New Ideas for Motion Representations, ECCV (2016)
- [18] Cooper, H., Bowden, R.: Learning signs from subtitles: A weakly supervised approach to sign language recognition. In: CVPR (2009)
- [19] Cooper, H., Pugeault, N., Bowden, R.: Reading the signs: A video based sign dictionary. In: ICCVW (2011)
- [20] Cooper, H., Holt, B., Bowden, R.: Sign language recognition. In: Visual Analysis of Humans: Looking at People, chap. 27, pp. 539 - 562. Springer (2011)
- [21] Crasborn, O.A., Van Der Kooij, E., Waters, D., Woll, B., Mesch, J.: Frequency distribution and spreading behavior of different types of mouth actions in three sign languages. Sign Language &amp; Linguistics (2008)
- [22] Eng-Jon Ong, Koller, O., Pugeault, N., Bowden, R.: Sign spotting using hierarchical sequential patterns with temporal intervals. In: CVPR (2014)
- [23] Farhadi, A., Forsyth, D.: Aligning ASL for statistical translation using a discriminative word model. In: CVPR (2006)
- [24] Farhadi, A., Forsyth, D.A., White, R.: Transfer learning in sign language. In: CVPR (2007)
- [25] Fillbrandt, H., Akyol, S., Kraiss, K..: Extraction of 3D hand shape and posture from image sequences for sign language recognition. In: IEEE International SOI Conference (2003)
- [26] Fisher, C.G.: Confusions among visually perceived consonants. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 11 (4), 796-804 (1968)
- [27] Forster, J., Oberdörfer, C., Koller, O., Ney, H.: Modality combination techniques for continuous sign language recognition. In: Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis (2013)
- [28] Graves, A., Fernández, S., Gomez, F., Schmidhuber, J.: Connectionist temporal classification: Labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. In: ICML (2006)
- [29] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: CVPR (2016)
- [30] Hu, J., Shen, L., Albanie, S., Sun, G., Wu, E.: Squeeze-and-excitation networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2019)
- [31] Huang, J., Zhou, W., Li, H., Li, W.: Sign language recognition using 3D convolutional neural networks. In: International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME) (2015)
- [32] Huang, J., Zhou, W., Zhang, Q., Li, H., Li, W.: Video-based sign language recognition without temporal segmentation. In: AAAI (2018)
- [33] Jha, A., Namboodiri, V.P., Jawahar, C.V.: Word spotting in silent lip videos. In: WACV (2018)
- [34] Joze, H.R.V., Koller, O.: MS-ASL: A large-scale data set and benchmark for understanding american sign language. In: BMVC (2019)
- [35] Koller, O., Forster, J., Ney, H.: Continuous sign language recognition: Towards large vocabulary statistical recognition systems handling multiple signers. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 141 , 108-125 (2015)
- [36] Koller, O., Ney, H., Bowden, R.: Read my lips: Continuous signer independent weakly supervised viseme recognition. In: ECCV (2014)
- [37] Koller, O., Ney, H., Bowden, R.: Weakly supervised automatic transcription of mouthings for gloss-based sign language corpora. In: LREC Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Beyond the Manual Channel (2014)
- [38] Koller, O., Ney, H., Bowden, R.: Deep learning of mouth shapes for sign language. In: Third Workshop on Assistive Computer Vision and Robotics, ICCV (2015)
- [39] Koller, O., Zargaran, S., Ney, H.: Re-Sign: Re-aligned end-to-end sequence modelling with deep recurrent CNN-HMMs. In: CVPR (2017)
- [40] Li, D., Opazo, C.R., Yu, X., Li, H.: Word-level deep sign language recognition from video: A new large-scale dataset and methods comparison. In: WACV (2019)
- [41] Li, D., Yu, X., Xu, C., Petersson, L., Li, H.: Transferring cross-domain knowledge for video sign language recognition. In: CVPR (2020)
- [42] Lin, T.Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D., Dollár, P., Zitnick, C.L.: Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In: ECCV (2014)
- [43] Liu, W., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Szegedy, C., Reed, S., Fu, C.Y., Berg, A.C.: Ssd: Single shot multibox detector. In: ECCV (2016)
- [44] Malisiewicz, T., Gupta, A., Efros, A.A.: Ensemble of exemplar-svms for object detection and beyond. In: ICCV (2011)
- [45] Materzynska, J., Berger, G., Bax, I., Memisevic, R.: The Jester dataset: A large-scale video dataset of human gestures. In: ICCVW (2019)
- [46] Momeni, L., Afouras, T., Stafylakis, T., Albanie, S., Zisserman, A.: Seeing wake words: Audio-visual keyword spotting. arXiv (2020)
- [47] Nguyen, T.D., Ranganath, S.: Tracking facial features under occlusions and recognizing facial expressions in sign language. In: International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (2008)
- [48] Ong, E., Cooper, H., Pugeault, N., Bowden, R.: Sign language recognition using sequential pattern trees. In: CVPR (2012)
- [49] Pfister, T., Charles, J., Zisserman, A.: Large-scale learning of sign language by watching tv (using co-occurrences). In: BMVC (2013)
- [50] Pfister, T., Charles, J., Zisserman, A.: Domain-adaptive discriminative one-shot learning of gestures. In: ECCV (2014)
- [51] Schembri, A., Fenlon, J., Rentelis, R., Cormier, K.: British Sign Language Corpus Project: A corpus of digital video data and annotations of British Sign Language 2008-2017 (Third Edition) (2017), [http://www.bslcorpusproject.org](http://www.bslcorpusproject.org/)
- [52] Schembri, A., Fenlon, J., Rentelis, R., Reynolds, S., Cormier, K.: Building the British sign language corpus. Language Documentation &amp; Conservation 7 , 136-154 (2013)
- [53] Stafylakis, T., Tzimiropoulos, G.: Zero-shot keyword spotting for visual speech recognition in-the-wild. In: ECCV (2018)
- [54] Starner, T.: Visual Recognition of American Sign Language Using Hidden Markov Models. Master's thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1995)
- [55] Sutton-Spence, R.: Mouthings and simultaneity in British sign language. In: Simultaneity in Signed Languages: Form and Function, pp. 147-162. John Benjamins (2007)
- [56] Sutton-Spence, R., Woll, B.: The Linguistics of British Sign Language: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press (1999)
- [57] Tamura, S., Kawasaki, S.: Recognition of sign language motion images. Pattern Recognition 21 (4), 343 - 353 (1988)
- [58] Valli, C., University, G.: The Gallaudet Dictionary of American Sign Language. Gallaudet University Press (2005)
- [59] Viitaniemi, V., Jantunen, T., Savolainen, L., Karppa, M., Laaksonen, J.: S-pot - a benchmark in spotting signs within continuous signing. In: LREC (2014)
- [60] von Agris, U., Knorr, M., Kraiss, K.: The significance of facial features for automatic sign language recognition. In: 2008 8th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face Gesture Recognition (2008)
- [61] Wilbur, R.B., Kak, A.C.: Purdue RVL-SLLL American sign language database. School of Electrical and Computer Engineering Technical Report, TR-06-12, Purdue University, W. Lafayette, IN 47906. (2006)
- [62] Woll, B.: The sign that dares to speak its name: Echo phonology in British sign language (BSL). In: Boyes-Braem, P., Sutton-Spence, R. (eds.) The hands are the head of the mouth: The mouth as articulator in sign languages, pp. 87-98. Hamburg: Signum Press (2001)
- [63] Yang, S., Luo, P., Loy, C.C., Tang, X.: Wider face: A face detection benchmark. In: CVPR (2016)
- [64] Yao, Y., Wang, T., Du, H., Zheng, L., Gedeon, T.: Spotting visual keywords from temporal sliding windows. In: Mandarin Audio-Visual Speech Recognition Challenge (2019)
- [65] Ye, Y., Tian, Y., Huenerfauth, M., Liu, J.: Recognizing american sign language gestures from within continuous videos. In: CVPRW (2018)
- [66] Zhang, M., Lucas, J., Ba, J., Hinton, G.E.: Lookahead optimizer: k steps forward, 1 step back. In: NeurIPS (2019)
- [67] Zhou, H., Zhou, W., Zhou, Y., Li, H.: Spatial-temporal multi-cue network for continuous sign language recognition. CoRR abs/2002.03187 (2020)

APPENDIX

This document provides additional results (Section [0.A](#Pt0.A1) ),

details about the video pose distillation model (Section

[0.B](#Pt0.A2) ),

and about the BSL-1K dataset (Section

[0.C](#Pt0.A3) ).

## Appendix 0.A Additional Results

In this section, we present complementary results

to the main paper.

Section

[0.A.1](#Pt0.A1.SS1) provides a qualitative analysis.

Additional experiments investigate

the search window size for mouthing (Section

[0.A.2](#Pt0.A1.SS2) ),

the number of frames for sign recognition (Section

[0.A.3](#Pt0.A1.SS3) ),

the effect of masking the mouth at test time (Section

[0.A.4](#Pt0.A1.SS4) ),

ensembling part-specific models (Section

[0.A.5](#Pt0.A1.SS5) ),

the transfer to co-articulated datasets (Section

[0.A.6](#Pt0.A1.SS6) ),

and the baselines using other cues (Section

[0.A.7](#Pt0.A1.SS7) ).

### 0.A.1 Qualitative analysis

We provide a video on our project page 5 5 5 [https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/bsl1k/](https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/bsl1k/) to illustrate the automatically annotated training samples

in our BSL-1K dataset, as well

as the results of our sign recognition

model on the manually verified test set.

Figures

[A.1](#Pt0.A1.F1) and [A.2](#Pt0.A1.F2) present some of these results.

In Figure

[A.1](#Pt0.A1.F1) , we provide training samples localised using mouthing cues.

In Figure

[A.2](#Pt0.A1.F2) , we provide test samples classified by our I3D model trained

on the automatic annotations.

Figure A.1: Mouthing results: Qualitative samples for the visual keyword spotting method for the keywords "happy"
and "important". We visualise the top 24 videos with the
most confident mouthing scores for each word. We note the visual similarity
among manual features which suggests that mouthing cues
can be a good starting point to automatically annotate
training samples.

<!-- image -->

Figure A.2: Sign recognition results: Qualitative
samples for our sign language recognition I3D model on the BSL-1K
test set. We visualise the top 24 videos
with the highest classification scores for the signs
"orange" and "business", which appear to be all correctly
classified.

<!-- image -->

### 0.A.2 Size of the search window for visual keyword spotting

We investigate the influence of varying the extent of the temporal window around a given subtitle during the visual keyword spotting phase of dataset collection. For this experiment, we run the visual keyword spotting model with different search window sizes (centring these windows on the subtitle locations), and train sign recognition models (following the protocol described in the main paper, using Kinetics initialisation) on the resulting annotations. We find (Table [A.1](#Pt0.A1.T1) ) that 8-second extended search windows yield the strongest performance on the test set (which is fixed across each run)-we therefore use these for all experiments used in the main paper.

### 0.A.3 Temporal extent of the automatic annotations

Keyword spotting provides a precise localisation in time,

but does not determine the duration of the sign. We observe

that the highest mouthing confidence is obtained at the end of mouthing. We therefore take a certain number of frames before

this peak to include in our sign classification training.

In Table

[A.2](#Pt0.A1.T2) , we experiment with this hyper-parameter and see that

20 frames is a good compromise for creating variation in training,

while not including too many irrelevant frames. In all of our

experiments, we used 24 frames, except in

Table

[6](#S5.T6) which combines the best parameters from each ablation,

where we used 20 frames.

Note that our I3D

model takes in 16 consecutive frames as input, which is sliced

randomly during training.

### 0.A.4 Masking the mouth region at test time

Figure A.3: Masking the mouth: Sample visualisations for the inputs
described in
Table 4 (for the signs "important" and "library"). We experiment with masking the mouth
region or cropping only the face region using the detected pose keypoints.

<!-- image -->

In Table [A.3](#Pt0.A1.T3) ,

we experiment with the test modes for the networks trained with

(i) full-frames including the mouth, versus

(ii) masking the mouth region.

If the mouth is masked only

at test time, the performance drops from 65.57% to 34.74%

suggesting the model's significant reliance on the mouth cues.

The model can be improved to 46.75% if it is forced to

focus on other regions by training with masked mouth.

### 0.A.5 Late fusion of part-specific models.

We further experiment with ensembling two I3D networks,

each specialising on different parts of the human body,

by averaging the classification scores, i.e., late fusion.

The results are summarised in Table

[A.4](#Pt0.A1.T4) .

We observe significant improvements

when combining a mouth-specific model (face-crop)

with a body-specific model (mouth-masked),

which suggests that forcing the network to

focus on separate, but complementary signing cues (68.55%)

can be more effective than presenting the full-frames (65.57%).

This procedure; however, involves additional complexity

of computing the human pose and training two separate models.

It is therefore only used for experimental purposes.

Figure [A.3](#Pt0.A1.F3) presents sample

visualisations for the masking procedure.

For mouth-masking, we replace the box covering the mouth region

with the average pixel of the region. For face-cropping,

we set pixels outside of the face region to zero

(we observed divergence of training if the mean value

was used).

### 0.A.6 Transferring BSL-1K pretrained model to other datasets

As explained in

Section

[5.3](#S5.SS3) ,

we use our model pretrained on BSL-1K as initialisation for transferring

to other datasets.

Additional details on fine-tuning for ASL. For MSASL [ [34](#bib.bib34) ] and WLASL [ [40](#bib.bib40) ] isolated datasets on ASL, we have used the pretraining with the

mouth-masking to force the model to entirely pay attention to manual features.

We also observed that some signs are identical between ASL and BSL; therefore,

instead of randomly initialising the last classification layer, we have kept

the weights corresponding to common words between BSL-1K and the ASL dataset.

We observed slight improvements with both of these choices.

Results on co-articulated datasets. Here, we report the results

of training sign language recognition on two co-articulated datasets: (i) RWTH-PHOENIX-Weather-2014-T [

[35](#bib.bib35) , [10](#bib.bib10) ] and (ii) BSL-Corpus [ [51](#bib.bib51) , [52](#bib.bib52) ] , with and without

pretraining on BSL-1K.

Phoenix dataset is not directly applicable to our model due to the lack of sign-gloss

alignment to train I3D with short clips of individual signs. We therefore

implemented a simple CTC loss [

[28](#bib.bib28) ] to adapt I3D for Phoenix

and obtained 5.6 WER improvement with BSL-1K pretraining over Kinetics pretraining.

BSL-Corpus is a linguistic dataset, and has not been used for computer vision research so far. We defined a train/val/test split (8:1:1 ratio) for a subset of 6k annotations of 966 signs and obtained 24.4% vs 12.8% accuracy with/without BSL-1K pretraining. In this case, we have also kept the last-layer classification weights for which the words are in common between BSL-Corpus and BSL-1K signs. We observed this to provide small gains over completely random initialisation of classification weights.

We conclude that our large-scale BSL-1K dataset provides a strong initialisation

for both co-articulated and isolated datasets; for a variety of sign languages: ASL (American),

BSL (British), and DGS (German).

### 0.A.7 Dataset expansion through other cues and additional baselines

In addition to the experiments reported in the paper, we further implemented the dataset labelling technique described in [ [49](#bib.bib49) ] which searches subtitles for signs and picks candidate temporal windows that maximise the area under the ROC curve for positively and negatively labelled bags (here, a positive bag refers to temporal windows that occur within an approximately 400 frame interval centred on the target word). However, we found that without the use of the keyword spotting model for localisation, the annotations collected with this technique were extremely noisy, and the resulting model significantly under-performed all baselines reported in the main paper (that were instead trained on BSL-1K). We also experimented with dataset expansion through training ensembles of exemplar SVMs [ [44](#bib.bib44) ] for each episode on signs that were predicted as confident positives (greater than 0.8) by our strongest pretrained model (and using all temporal windows that did not include the keyword as negatives). In this case, we found it challenging to calibrate SVM confidences (we explored both the parameters of the original paper, who discuss the difficulties of this process [ [44](#bib.bib44) ] and a range of other parameters) and expanded the dataset by a factor of three, but did not achieve a boost in model performance when training on the expanded data.

## Appendix 0.B Video Pose Distillation

In this section, we give additional details of the video pose distillation model described in

Section

[4.3](#S4.SS3) .

The model architecture uses an I3D backbone [

[13](#bib.bib13) ] and takes as input a sequence of 16 frames at 224 × 224 224 224 224\times 224 pixels. We remove the classification head used in the original architecture and replace it with a linear layer that projects the 1024-dimensional embedding to 4160 dimensions-this corresponds to a set of 16 per-frame predictions of the x  y 𝑥 𝑦 xy coordinates of the 130 human pose keypoints produced by an OpenPose [ [12](#bib.bib12) ] model (trained on COCO [ [42](#bib.bib42) ] ). The coordinates are normalised (with respect to the dimensions of the input image) to lie in the range [ 0 , 1 ] 0 1 [0,1] and an L2 loss is used to penalise inaccurate predictions. The training data for the pose distillation model comprises one-minute segments from each episode used in the BSL-1K training set. The model is trained for 100 epochs using the Lookahead optimizer [ [66](#bib.bib66) ] with minibatches of 32 clips using a learning rate of 0.1 0.1 0.1 (reduced by a factor of 10 10 10 after 50 epochs) and a weight decay of 0.001 0.001 0.001 .

## Appendix 0.C BSL-1K Dataset Details

### 0.C.1 Sign verification tool

In Figure [A.4](#Pt0.A3.F4) , we show a screenshot of the verification tool used by annotators to verify or reject signs found by the proposed keyword spotting method in the test set. Annotators have the ability to view the sign at reduced speed and indicate whether the sign is correct, incorrect, or they are unsure.

Figure A.4: Manual annotation: A screenshot of the Whole-Sign Verification Tool.

<!-- image -->

### 0.C.2 Dataset source material

The BBC broadcast TV shows, together with their respective number of occurrences in the source material used to construct the dataset are:

Countryfile: 266, Natural World: 70, Great British Railway Journeys: 122, Holby City: 261, Junior Masterchef: 24, Junior Bake Off: 22, Hairy Bikers Bakeation: 6, Masterchef The Professionals: 37, Doctor Who Sci Fi: 23, Great British Menu: 110, A To Z Of Cooking: 24, Raymond Blanc Kitchen Secrets: 9, The Apprentice: 88, Country Show Cook Off: 18, A Taste Of Britain: 20, Lorraine Pascale How To Be A: 6, Chefs Put Your Menu Where Your: 13, Simply Nigella: 7, The Restaurant Man: 5, Hairy Bikers Best Of British: 27, Rip Off Britain Food: 20, Our Food Uk 4: 3, Disaster Chefs: 8, Terry And Mason Great Food Trip: 19, Gardeners World: 70, Paul Hollywood Pies Puds: 20, James Martin Food Map Of Britain: 10, Baking Made Easy: 6, Hairy Bikers Northern: 7, Nigel Slater Eating Together: 6, Raymond Blanc How To Cook Well: 6, Great British Food Revival: 17, Great British Bake Off: 28, Two Greedy Italians: 4, Food Fighters: 10, Hairy Bikers Mums Know Best: 9, Hairy Bikers Meals On Wheels: 6, Paul Hollywood Bread 6: 5, Home Comfort At Christmas: 1

### 0.C.3 Dataset vocabulary

The 1,064 words which form the vocabulary for BSL-1K are:

abortion, about, above, absorb, accept, access, act, activity, actually, add, address, advance, advertise, afford, afghanistan, africa, afternoon, again, against, agree, aids, alcohol, all, already, always, amazed, america, angel, angry, animal, answer, anything, anyway, apple, apprentice, approach, april, apron, arch, archery, architect, area, argue, arm, army, around, arrive, arrogant, art, asian, ask, assess, atmosphere, attack, attention, attitude, auction, australia, austria, automatic, autumn, average, award, awful, baby, back, bacon, bad, balance, ball, ballet, balloon, banana, bank, barbecue, base, basketball, bath, battery, beach, beat, because, bedroom, beef, been, before, behind, belfast, belgium, believe, belt, better, big, billion, bingo, bird, birmingham, birthday, biscuit, bite, bitter, black, blackpool, blame, blanket, blind, blonde, blood, blue, boat, body, bomb, bone, bonnet, book, booked, border, boring, born, borrow, boss, both, bottle, boundary, bowl, box, boxing, branch, brave, bread, break, breathe, brick, bridge, brief, brighton, bring, bristol, britain, brother, brown, budget, buffet, build, bulgaria, bull, bury, bus, bush, business, but, butcher, butter, butterfly, buy, by, cabbage, calculator, calendar, call, camel, camera, can, canada, cancel, candle, cap, captain, caravan, cardiff, careful, carpenter, castle, casual, cat, catch, catholic, ceiling, cellar, certificate, chair, chalk, challenge, chance, change, character, charge, chase, cheap, cheat, check, cheeky, cheese, chef, cherry, chicken, child, china, chips, chocolate, choose, christmas, church, city, clean, cleaner, clear, clever, climb, clock, closed, clothes, cloud, club, coffee, coffin, cold, collapse, collect, college, column, combine, come, comedy, comfortable, comment, communicate, communist, community, company, compass, competition, complicated, compound, computer, concentrate, confident, confidential, confirm, continue, control, cook, copy, corner, cornwall, cottage, council, country, course, court, cousin, cover, cracker, crash, crazy, create, cricket, crisps, cross, cruel, culture, cup, cupboard, curriculum, custard, daddy, damage, dance, danger, daughter, deaf, debate, december, decide, decline, deep, degree, deliver, denmark, dentist, depend, deposit, depressed, depth, derby, desire, desk, detail, detective, devil, different, dig, disabled, disagree, disappear, disappoint, discuss, disk, distract, divide, dizzy, doctor, dog, dolphin, donkey, double, downhill, drawer, dream, drink, drip, drive, drop, drunk, dry, dublin, dvd, each, early, east, easter, easy, edinburgh, egypt, eight, elastic, electricity, elephant, eleven, embarrassed, emotion, empty, encourage, end, engaged, england, enjoy, equal, escalator, escape, ethnic, europe, evening, everything, evidence, exact, exchange, excited, excuse, exeter, exhausted, expand, expect, expensive, experience, explain, express, extract, face, factory, fairy, fall, false, family, famous, fantastic, far, farm, fast, fat, father, fault, fax, february, feed, feel, fence, fifteen, fifty, fight, film, final, finance, find, fine, finish, finland, fire, fireman, first, fish, fishing, five, flag, flat, flock, flood, flower, fog, follow, football, for, foreign, forever, forget, fork, formal, forward, four, fourteen, fox, france, free, freeze, fresh, friday, friend, frog, from, front, fruit, frustrated, fry, full, furniture, future, game, garden, general, generous, geography, germany, ginger, girl, give, glasgow, glass, gold, golf, gorilla, gossip, government, grab, grandfather, grandmother, greedy, green, group, grow, guarantee, guess, guilty, gym, hair, half, hall, hamburger, hammer, hamster, handshake, hang, happen, happy, hard, hat, have, headache, hearing, heart, heavy, helicopter, hello, help, hide, history, holiday, holland, home, hope, hopeless, horrible, horse, hospital, hot, hotel, hour, house, how, hundred, hungry, hypocrite, idea, if, ignore, imagine, impact, important, impossible, improve, income, increase, independent, india, influence, inform, information, injection, insert, instant, insurance, international, internet, interrupt, interview, introduce, involve, ireland, iron, italy, jamaica, january, japan, jealous, jelly, jersey, join, joke, jumper, just, kangaroo, karate, keep, kitchen, label, language, laptop, last, late, later, laugh, leaf, leave, leeds, left, lemon, library, lighthouse, lightning, like, line, link, list, little, live, liverpool, london, lonely, lost, love, lovely, machine, madrid, magic, make, man, manage, manchester, many, march, mark, marry, match, maybe, meaning, meat, mechanic, medal, meet, meeting, melon, member, mention, message, metal, mexico, milk, million, mind, minute, mirror, miserable, miss, mistake, mix, monday, money, monkey, month, more, morning, most, mother, motorbike, mountain, mouse, move, mum, music, must, name, nasty, national, naughty, navy, necklace, negative, nervous, never, newcastle, newspaper, next, nice, nightclub, normal, north, norway, not, nothing, notice, november, now, number, nursery, object, october, offer, office, old, on, once, one, onion, only, open, operate, opposite, or, oral, orange, order, other, out, oven, over, overtake, owl, own, pack, page, pager, paint, pakistan, panic, paper, paris, park, partner, party, passport, past, pattern, pay, payment, pence, penguin, people, percent, perfect, perhaps, period, permanent, person, personal, persuade, petrol, photo, piano, picture, pig, pineapple, pink, pipe, place, plain, plan, plaster, plastic, plate, please, plenty, plumber, plus, point, poland, police, politics, pop, popular, porridge, portsmouth, portugal, posh, poster, potato, pound, practise, praise, prefer, pregnant, president, pretend, price, priest, print, prison, problem, professional, professor, profile, profit, project, promise, promote, protestant, proud, provide, pub, pull, pulse, punch, purple, push, pyramid, quality, quarter, question, quick, quiet, quit, rabbit, race, radio, rain, rather, read, reading, ready, really, receipt, receive, recommend, red, reduce, region, regular, relationship, relax, release, relief, remember, remind, remove, rent, repair, replace, research, resign, respect, retire, review, rhubarb, rich, ride, right, river, rocket, roll, roman, room, roots, rough, round, rub, rubbish, rugby, run, russia, sack, sad, safe, same, sand, sandwich, satellite, saturday, sauce, sausage, school, science, scissors, scotland, scratch, search, second, seed, seem, self, sell, send, sense, sensitive, sentence, separate, september, sequence, service, settle, seven, sex, shadow, shakespeare, shame, shark, sharp, sheep, sheet, sheffield, shine, shirt, shop, should, shoulder, shout, show, shower, sick, sight, sign, silver, similar, since, sister, sit, six, size, skeleton, skin, sleep, sleepy, small, smell, smile, snake, soft, some, sometimes, son, soon, sorry, south, spain, specific, speech, spend, spicy, spider, spirit, split, sport, spray, spread, squash, squirrel, staff, stand, star, start, station, still, story, straight, strange, stranger, strawberry, stress, stretch, strict, string, strong, structure, stubborn, stuck, student, study, stupid, success, sugar, summer, sun, sunday, sunset, support, suppose, surprise, swan, swap, sweden, sweep, swim, swing, switzerland, sympathy, take, talk, tap, taste, tax, taxi, teacher, team, technology, television, temperature, temporary, ten, tennis, tent, terminate, terrified, that, theory, therefore, thing, think, thirsty, thousand, three, through, thursday, ticket, tidy, tiger, time, tired, title, toast, together, toilet, tomato, tomorrow, toothbrush, toothpaste, top, torch, total, touch, tough, tournament, towel, town, train, training, tram, trap, travel, tree, trouble, trousers, true, try, tube, tuesday, turkey, twelve, twenty, twice, two, ugly, ultrasound, umbrella, uncle, under, understand, unemployed, union, unit, university, until, up, upset, valley, vegetarian, video, vinegar, visit, vodka, volcano, volunteer, vote, wait, wales, walk, wall, want, war, warm, wash, waste, watch, water, weak, weather, wednesday, week, weekend, well, west, wet, what, wheelchair, when, where, which, whistle, white, who, why, wicked, width, wild, will, win, wind, window, wine, with, without, witness, wolf, woman, wonder, wonderful, wood, wool, work, world, worry, worship, worth, wow, write, wrong, yes, yesterday.

## References

- [[843ab3e628aadd9415d96e16d6aef638c474bac1]] — The Gallaudet Dictionary of American Sign Language (2021)
- [[0835f6c5094b6d1b164f02f31a7234b82177c913]] — Seeing wake words: Audio-visual Keyword Spotting (2020)
- [[efe28238909dc5c1877297fa830d85e9daecc29f]] — Transferring Cross-Domain Knowledge for Video Sign Language Recognition (2020)
- [[a1e2665ac39dcb389e12f3f993004b4b4651826d]] — Spatial-Temporal Multi-Cue Network for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2020)
- [[874063b6c71aef8382eb66a66d8a1c1188e78a9a]] — Word-level Deep Sign Language Recognition from Video: A New Large-scale Dataset and Methods Comparison (2019)
- [[d2fb5712d639658310c28785f74e6f7f8cf65630]] — Spotting Visual Keywords from Temporal Sliding Windows (2019)
- [[8ef708ce97183dc9a0e9514a80fc8dacf7ca29c5]] — The Jester Dataset: A Large-Scale Video Dataset of Human Gestures (2019)
- [[04323b8f60e261af54aec4b5cd345cbdd475267d]] — Zero-Shot Sign Language Recognition: Can Textual Data Uncover Sign Languages? (2019)
- [[600be3dde18d1059c6b56170bd04ee65ce79a848]] — Lookahead Optimizer: k steps forward, 1 step back (2019)
- [[9e8db1519245426f3a78752a3d8360484f4626b1]] — OpenPose: Realtime Multi-Person 2D Pose Estimation Using Part Affinity Fields (2018)
- [[310a8e2c9f2650fa2e44fdf0d82d11c0cb3e387e]] — MS-ASL: A Large-Scale Data Set and Benchmark for Understanding American Sign Language (2018)
- [[fcecc4ef2c32dbedda61648febb39a0f905c367e]] — Deep Audio-Visual Speech Recognition (2018)
- [[dd38fdd745c5e1b4ee5ce9e646fc36bcb800848d]] — Zero-shot keyword spotting for visual speech recognition in-the-wild (2018)
- [[644602c65a5d8f30e62be027eb7b47f7c335191a]] — Neural Sign Language Translation (2018)
- [[6c40304a277c5f3f9e81f533b55c26bd449c5503]] — Recognizing American Sign Language Gestures from Within Continuous Videos (2018)
- [[f1ca3f211c6a60d805fc810f8736220be6f0cda9]] — Word Spotting in Silent Lip Videos (2018)
- [[a274fcf985aaec1f009cfe4b4042733321a5a8b4]] — Video-based Sign Language Recognition without Temporal Segmentation (2018)
- [[70c59dc3470ae867016f6ab0e008ac8ba03774a1]] — VGGFace2: A Dataset for Recognising Faces across Pose and Age (2017)
- [[a10cd29fec9dca66250dbde19db5e831f7ce6406]] — SubUNets: End-to-End Hand Shape and Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2017)
- [[df67d46e78aae0d2fccfb6212d101a342259c01b]] — Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks (2017)
- [[fb37561499573109fc2cebb6a7b08f44917267dd]] — Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks (2017)
- [[28b85543e8f12c3d2d2227dcc9f5e87c685535ea]] — Re-Sign: Re-Aligned End-to-End Sequence Modelling with Deep Recurrent CNN-HMMs (2017)
- [[b61a3f8b80bbd44f24544dc915f52fd30bbdf485]] — Quo Vadis, Action Recognition? A New Model and the Kinetics Dataset (2017)
- [[8b74252625c91375f55cbdd2e6415e752a281d10]] — Using Convolutional 3D Neural Networks for User-independent continuous gesture recognition (2016)
- [[dfad8f616bd2a05c8cae5f61060f743f966ece85]] — Realtime Multi-person 2D Pose Estimation Using Part Affinity Fields (2016)
- [[74f1c93dd3a8c3f9fa59fadef9a744234b2977eb]] — Lip Reading in the Wild (2016)
- [[bed6d0097df1e9ac82f789f6da268cdb3dd65bc3]] — Lip Reading Sentences in the Wild (2016)
- [[e48f2456533874e26c31125e9fd1affc4321560c]] — Signs in time: Encoding human motion as a temporal image (2016)
- [[2c03df8b48bf3fa39054345bafabfeff15bfd11d]] — Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition (2015)
- [[4d7a9197433acbfb24ef0e9d0f33ed1699e4a5b0]] — SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector (2015)
- [[39cf849f5af8dbc7fca81c6f16cbe482b38ab329]] — Deep Learning of Mouth Shapes for Sign Language (2015)
- [[562737212e6e63c75689a28f72d132ee3183cff3]] — Continuous sign language recognition: Towards large vocabulary statistical recognition systems handling multiple signers (2015)
- [[52d7eb0fbc3522434c13cc247549f74bb9609c5d]] — WIDER FACE: A Face Detection Benchmark (2015)
- [[6f1f9f27a679cd3f8b97079577676112cd752713]] — Sign Language Recognition using 3D convolutional neural networks (2015)
- [[fce92d78c08e17f0e6712b359bba81f4f3d8805d]] — A survey on mouth modeling and analysis for Sign Language recognition (2015)
- [[0f7f0b5f15ac3fb9d2f1c1f90a5cb672e9e95a87]] — Read My Lips: Continuous Signer Independent Weakly Supervised Viseme Recognition (2014)
- [[de8b0a219bd8dbacc9f83b2b46d95fe0f24b95a2]] — Domain-Adaptive Discriminative One-Shot Learning of Gestures (2014)
- [[854cda845e5bfe503b9fc0ad9eb825ac9bb9dc7b]] — Sign Spotting Using Hierarchical Sequential Patterns with Temporal Intervals (2014)
- [[f2e27d22ee3f39aeb96c027ffc2ac087e8f51db0]] — Weakly Supervised Automatic Transcription of Mouthings for Gloss-Based Sign Language Corpora (2014)
- [[e110113ca6b1e2691991175776a2a5e60dcd0095]] — S-pot - a benchmark in spotting signs within continuous signing (2014)
- [[71b7178df5d2b112d07e45038cb5637208659ff7]] — Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context (2014)
- [[890614f30de4d2e651b66858e871ea5fe2f1d98a]] — Building the British Sign Language Corpus (2013)
- [[9792c7e26a9e5075761cb87d7a3bf2737311ef4e]] — Modality Combination Techniques for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2013)
- [[e8a184e76d6476ecc27857b1c1b280af5628d0ae]] — Sign Language Recognition using Sequential Pattern Trees (2012)
- [[d124f004fed2ee15860f624005b2215cfaeff276]] — Ensemble of exemplar-SVMs for object detection and beyond (2011)
- [[f6de1d610ee966d0b652c6a0bd8c3622e517ebd5]] — Reading the signs: A video based sign dictionary (2011)
- [[34b7e826db49a16773e8747bc8dfa48e344e425d]] — Learning sign language by watching TV (using weakly aligned subtitles) (2009)
- [[46b658f9e291b1ff1684aa9f778c31ed1c92a23a]] — Learning signs from subtitles: A weakly supervised approach to sign language recognition (2009)
- [[5a6722fe7577f78b4cd82ab76265067d7d7a8baf]] — The significance of facial features for automatic sign language recognition (2008)
- [[fa080fe9c11d9630a50ad98c97be934c477b89e8]] — Tracking facial features under occlusions and recognizing facial expressions in sign language (2008)
- [[cb1c84c69d4b8a7b633349800e8f5a93f3551452]] — The American Sign Language Lexicon Video Dataset (2008)
- [[c084238679a3b12426901cf184be25d443b34cf3]] — Recent developments in visual sign language recognition (2008)
- [[fd357c773c5531b35d9050fcb066fdd35211611f]] — Transfer Learning in Sign language (2007)
- [[b221d3131fce10f1030ba317c076ed5b6e80c630]] — Mouthings and Simultaneity in British Sign Language (2007)
- [[261a056f8b21918e8616a429b2df6e1d5d33be41]] — Connectionist temporal classification: labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks (2006)
- [[6957ecc299b76faaef1dc2c833a0f76ab76eb35e]] — Aligning ASL for Statistical Translation Using a Discriminative Word Model (2006)
- [[6531af2f185261962b47a008633ea7939add6575]] — Extraction of 3D hand shape and posture from image sequences for sign language recognition (2003)
- [[051cd3f8cc34fa06c1440fce162a3cf8b7344ea3]] — The Linguistics of British Sign Language: Index of signs in the text (1999)
- [[0b9712ad56c6821cfe05ba5ddeb22a71000397d4]] — Visual Recognition of American Sign Language Using Hidden Markov Models. (1995)
- [[69494481ace5549e8dfe2041cdc006090997c7a7]] — Recognition of sign language motion images (1988)
- [[0774057249f18840d000397e3510408e8659b0a8]] — Confusions among visually perceived consonants. (1968)
- [[845ee9838c1f5bf63b7db2c95ec5d27af14a4e02]] — Connectionist Temporal Classiﬁcation: Labelling Unsegmented Sequences with Recurrent Neural Networks (2016)
- The devisign large vocabulary of chinese sign language database and baseline evaluations (2014)
- [[31ab5dafb152d8b386f015db3396202ba186234e]] — British Sign Language Corpus Project: A corpus of digital video data and annotations of British Sign Language 2008-2014 (2014)
- [[140b6f1132cfd34e409a286e921fabacff3783f3]] — Large-scale Learning of Sign Language by Watching TV (Using Co-occurrences) (2013)
- [[258fc3e47f36d0ba3a7f6bcdf6f97bc2f293255d]] — Sign Language Recognition (2011)
- [[70ed2346577c5181c35264a76987dd8cf6bf4907]] — Variation in mouth actions with manual signs in Sign Language of the Netherlands (NGT) (2011)
- [[7231c79906ad72316155e132a8696d67467b0c1a]] — Frequency distribution and spreading behavior of different types of mouth actions in three sign languages (2008)
- [[6cb1f6e1de7aa9c183b156d52e58770514381b0e]] — Purdue RVL-SLLL American Sign Language Database (2006)
- [[7d425e0e55ad8222d0abb67e5da540e271cb0315]] — The sign that dares to speak its name: echo phonology in British Sign Language (2001)
- Great British Menu: 110, A To Z Of Cooking: 24, Raymond Blanc Kitchen Secrets: 9, The Apprentice: 88, Country Show Cook Off: 18, A Taste Of Britain: 20, Lorraine Pascale How To Be A: 6 ()
- Eating Together: 6, Raymond Blanc How To Cook Well: 6, Great British Food Revival: 17, Great British Bake Off: 28 ()
- Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 17 ()

## Cited by

- [[2b32a45281d91d6117287898191e170aa50d4800]] — An overview of sign language processing from natural language processing perspective (2026)
- [[f84406a0fe360bc082683acf70be2436eb7202df]] — Think in Latent Thoughts: A New Paradigm for Gloss-Free Sign Language Translation (2026)
- [[5d04d00d15c87abb9f0f02ba924618859f766781]] — AuslanSpell: An Interactive Technology for Improving Auslan Fingerspelling Comprehension (2026)
- [[b4118b4ab70adeaedc6d0008523fc9879dac3623]] — AI - Powered Interactive Sign Language Learning Assistant (2026)
- [[b4480bcdd3f8915cadf1d5262ca50edce116e593]] — Recognising BSL Fingerspelling in Continuous Signing Sequences (2026)
- [[1dc9cc2ee2db8c746fa3bf08684a52a9f024cf36]] — Mobile Auslan: A multimodal dialogue-centered sign language learning system (2026)
- [[e646085a7eb7dd6e143df5a6de50e121369fa481]] — SignIT: A Comprehensive Dataset and Multimodal Analysis for Italian Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[97f68acfae2157810ca22af735b24b8f6c59cab1]] — Segment, Embed, and Align: A Universal Recipe for Aligning Subtitles to Signing (2025)
- [[8b440fd23f5533afd77de1bab2c8f8d1f2337339]] — Lost in Translation, Found in Embeddings: Sign Language Translation and Alignment (2025)
- [[14129532fb634156ac5ce0631b914e7c5516227e]] — Unified Spatiotemporal Detection for Isolated Sign Language Recognition Using YOLO-Act (2025)
- [[6dadfd65c1d1380b4feaddd7241c4a893c73243d]] — RoCoISLR: A Romanian Corpus for Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[40722886726ac2da2cd9d0a535abd298ffe6362a]] — A Bidirectional Sign Language Interaction System using Multimodal Deep Learning (2025)
- [[8322f850066313d7a3832b1b2fedfa55ba37e4b0]] — Retrieval-Augmented Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[14b593f1839b322027385acffdbd2adf064296b1]] — Isolated German Sign Language Recognition for Classifying Polar Answers Using Landmarks and Lightweight Transformers (2025)
- [[6c48c6a183d4eb15a99f4f5cd638ad6b89d4f687]] — Sentence-level Segmentation for Long Sign Language Videos with Captions (2025)
- [[465645990bf8e0a75d6a646811aade6f0c6060d0]] — How Pragmatics Shape Articulation: A Computational Case Study in STEM ASL Discourse (2025)
- [[f4a55fb45b1d57544523691edaf799600181f1b5]] — AI-Driven Sign Language Recognition System with NLP-Enhanced Transcription (2025)
- [[28e84206f7545e607fb2977a4cea42d744cc1837]] — Holistic-Based Cross-Attention Modal Fusion Network for Video Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[870d9a166172e82e57099b5031f2454bad7cad83]] — Text-Driven 3D Hand Motion Generation from Sign Language Data (2025)
- [[e4af78c9176b685ad4cd5a81c7668e88f63f2aed]] — Two-hand on-skin gesture recognition: a dataset and classification network for enhanced human–computer interaction (2025)
- [[083af847b026105bdaf93dbfc1824548ba456286]] — MSE-GCN: A Multiscale Spatiotemporal Feature Aggregation Enhanced Efficient Graph Convolutional Network for Dynamic Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[75003d9660458dc21175878fe6ededcc8150a76d]] — AutoSign: Direct Pose-to-Text Translation for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[5e2d78026cc39f477639b6f75cdcc8c1c5ff2a13]] — Sentence-based Sign Language Recognition using CNN and NLP (2025)
- [[13ce8c737a71c9a365bcd48ed17d3803ae2a18e0]] — SAGE: Segment-Aware Gloss-Free Encoding for Token-Efficient Sign Language Translation (2025)
- [[4fc95da042c05ee6169821e657326f32c962d81b]] — Fusion of Multimodal Spatio-Temporal Features and 3D Deformable Convolution Based on Sign Language Recognition in Sensor Networks (2025)
- [[05aa2281e9140d12c3e5929eadbe96de6a5b9ab9]] — Sign Language Detection Using Deep Learning (2025)
- [[4dc90e257b95041ac55e06b6f660e640a329c153]] — VSNet: Focusing on the Linguistic Characteristics of Sign Language (2025)
- [[66e1bf848f0f431a2a7fa1ddab600fc958503532]] — Isharah: A Large-Scale Multi-Scene Dataset for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[f38220c09de1c9a0c57241c0d0373a04cc022c58]] — Transfer Learning from Visual Speech Recognition to Mouthing Recognition in German Sign Language (2025)
- [[63eea5048d8a6f1f2163f07e5bd8f3e950a0a08f]] — Logos as a Well-Tempered Pre-train for Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[71725607eafedb512af4ebf96312de21716517bd]] — AuslanWeb: A Scalable Web-Based Australian Sign Language Communication System for Deaf and Hearing Individuals (2025)
- [[997d39b5c2cc3ac485e0c19a561bf0001ee1f0e8]] — SignRep: Enhancing Self-Supervised Sign Representations (2025)
- [[8c9d433641caa5bd7e43776db0b0faf4d12a0145]] — Deep Understanding of Sign Language for Sign to Subtitle Alignment (2025)
- [[c5c14b8f07a9056de1771ccfc2bf5aecf3594fd8]] — Empowering Deaf Communication: "Deep Learning Framework for Sign to Speech Translation" (2025)
- [[770f52f5b3818820fca02f82c93a4243851249f4]] — LGF-SLR: Hand Local–Global Fusion Network for Skeleton-Based Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[7aaecfcbf7b85bca25de77d3197f3d8f957a1ea6]] — Graph traverse reference network for sign language corpus retrieval in the wild (2025)
- [[9b7bddc4a237e0b050f6dc770d26dc36266dc77e]] — Sign Language Recognition: A Large-scale Multi-view Dataset and Comprehensive Evaluation (2025)
- [[bbf87d50e62ef8a40132dcc9a4ec1c4a80b03d15]] — SignFormer-GCN: Continuous sign language translation using spatio-temporal graph convolutional networks (2025)
- [[6309826dbeec61d35581238a8aa72a4f2139d5c1]] — Deep Learning-Based Sign Language Recognition: A Comprehensive Analysis (2025)
- [[e63367a49e1ff747cb9e02fc0d42bae4feb27508]] — Evaluating the Impact of Deep Learning Model Architecture on Sign Language Recognition Accuracy in Low-Resource Context (2025)
- [[8f29185135ce79f628d21edd388b2ffd6d9bbffc]] — Chinese sign language recognition and translation with virtual digital human dataset (2025)
- [[579ddc45b1d3cc849323da23f358b832788e71a5]] — Lost in Translation, Found in Context: Sign Language Translation with Contextual Cues (2025)
- [[08859a0bad6df7e8af4edfd16091aefc110cf881]] — VR Applications and Vision-Based Recognition Techniques for Sign Language: A Survey (2024)
- [[4228b96c08434e56715ead6a49932770c574a81b]] — New keypoint-based approach for recognising British Sign Language (BSL) from sequences (2024)
- [[f24b2d55156e8f7e0e612c4462039746b257250e]] — Gloss-Free Sign Language Translation using Sign2gpt-Next Technique (2024)
- [[1ffb51c115fd904f8ca2a080c8247711fe0780a8]] — Signs as Tokens: A Retrieval-Enhanced Multilingual Sign Language Generator (2024)
- [[4e6669a6845bd794cfd136dda42f718ca2fc24ce]] — Sign language interpretation using machine learning and artificial intelligence (2024)
- [[af82d1020c7b2d3b637e15c54ffe120d6f1d7083]] — Graph data science-driven framework to aid auditory and speech impaired individuals by accelerating sign image analysis and knowledge relegation through deep learning technique (2024)
- [[5d249e944564fcfac53ee2556eeaa90a00a0a195]] — The American Sign Language Knowledge Graph: Infusing ASL Models with Linguistic Knowledge (2024)
- [[f653c85945a15c0890ba99aea12dae966ccb9fb4]] — Swin-MSTP: Swin transformer with multi-scale temporal perception for continuous sign language recognition (2024)
- [[f02baaa33f013dc72768191925957b66fe6783f5]] — Overcoming Modality Bias in Question-Driven Sign Language Video Translation (2024)
- [[382c11d78cc85ed2f3239bb020273bcdddfa8af9]] — MM-WLAuslan: Multi-View Multi-Modal Word-Level Australian Sign Language Recognition Dataset (2024)
- [[ef6be3d24b3f801c6b8d15faab7032fcbcf99db4]] — Visual context learning based on cross-modal knowledge for continuous sign language recognition (2024)
- [[e5fe41a7752789b92af758e2af12cc8516e2f437]] — SCOPE: Sign Language Contextual Processing with Embedding from LLMs (2024)
- [[ba4639075817a458133fdac4908e8e25f179acfe]] — Reviewing 25 years of continuous sign language recognition research: Advances, challenges, and prospects (2024)
- [[8247c7a67e4e3e526cee10ca9499b1936204e79c]] — Scaling up Multimodal Pre-Training for Sign Language Understanding (2024)
- [[fbf3f4bf3681b220737329050f5e8bcb172bb605]] — SEDS: Semantically Enhanced Dual-Stream Encoder for Sign Language Retrieval (2024)
- [[75a7a3ab20a620f612db3337fcf6df03b304242d]] — SignCLIP: Connecting Text and Sign Language by Contrastive Learning (2024)
- [[c0647f641de652c3114c844b70c88204a81c96be]] — SML: A Skeleton-based multi-feature learning method for sign language recognition (2024)
- [[0d6b78072220375678f48e7fa53a0c96ec15fff4]] — Self-Supervised Representation Learning With Spatial-Temporal Consistency for Sign Language Recognition (2024)
- [[a3daddcd4a56f15ce2c05fe85dc0e0e4af98d8db]] — MASA: Motion-Aware Masked Autoencoder With Semantic Alignment for Sign Language Recognition (2024)
- [[13195df56368306dc1c1f9733cebb8dd694c94af]] — A Tale of Two Languages: Large-Vocabulary Continuous Sign Language Recognition from Spoken Language Supervision (2024)
- [[7e0238c7cd86f13280ff3c7d5c333e870ce4a440]] — Research and development of sign language recognition system using neural network algorithm (2024)
- [[f68a1468e8c027884d87868919db41cac31f8ab0]] — Sign2GPT: Leveraging Large Language Models for Gloss-Free Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[eabce17185aa25bdd86d675f8958d7cfabe3938b]] — A Hong Kong Sign Language Corpus Collected from Sign-interpreted TV News (2024)
- [[649b86d31d8ae10cc973da90e1e672d09c174764]] — DGS-Fabeln-1: A Multi-Angle Parallel Corpus of Fairy Tales between German Sign Language and German Text (2024)
- [[869cf45c0c77db3f513e11770f33375c43c6d86a]] — Matignon-LSF: a Large Corpus of Interpreted French Sign Language (2024)
- [[771274ba52488acc75eec34923516e25690f9482]] — Annotation of LSF subtitled videos without a pre-existing dictionary (2024)
- [[b43aaf0890eca0b6d4afc993e0b2f1e019d1be03]] — Gesture Recognition in Indian Sign Language Using Deep Learning Approach (2024)
- [[9e6baebb2cfbb82bb8f7ae6f72e7ab752256943d]] — Two Hands Are Better Than One: Resolving Hand to Hand Intersections via Occupancy Networks (2024)
- [[be750a466fb5db670c3d4e99616a0b6c28fe267d]] — Transfer Learning for Cross-Dataset Isolated Sign Language Recognition in Under-Resourced Datasets (2024)
- [[174802705b3fc61f855eef68b7f5a29103ae185d]] — Dynamic Spatial-Temporal Aggregation for Skeleton-Aware Sign Language Recognition (2024)
- [[ff98c2fd4907b117b62c4688c0f6843e39f0b6a1]] — Spotter+GPT: Turning Sign Spottings into Sentences with LLMs (2024)
- [[0e5abb02a11e0a754f7bd00c7b88997e5c77179b]] — A signer-independent sign language recognition method for the single-frequency dataset (2024)
- [[7fc461bac1c6dbd2b6b453ef909201924cf5e2cf]] — Synthetic Corpus Generation for Deep Learning-Based Translation of Spanish Sign Language (2024)
- [[e8f1f184edff7f12bc96f239b8c4a2f0043b552a]] — American Sign Language Video to Text Translation (2024)
- [[7007b8eb9152febc4ef6b7e7960f526efcc0a742]] — Continuous Sign Language Recognition for Hearing-Impaired Consumer Communication via Self-Guidance Network (2024)
- [[8a515cec1559414759aa3c732fa5f4ceb8972267]] — Towards Online Continuous Sign Language Recognition and Translation (2024)
- [[c3d0606b55f0c47138fd0c40a7dfaffd0ece0f3a]] — A Simple Baseline for Spoken Language to Sign Language Translation with 3D Avatars (2024)
- [[a06e59769ffb115e05f4dec887bb25168321b7da]] — Changepoint detection-assisted nonparametric clustering for unsupervised temporal sign segmentation (2024)
- [[331dffe8474b960d5d009ee3f42099f78b27bc80]] — Neural Sign Actors: A diffusion model for 3D sign language production from text (2023)
- [[2294f605aaedf020f57db94d62ab90f42bb7ba1b]] — TMS-Net: A multi-feature multi-stream multi-level information sharing network for skeleton-based sign language recognition (2023)
- [[52941cadbd340344f3e0a6f50719fe55b3de5088]] — Multimodal Large Language Models: A Survey (2023)
- [[aac82bf9ae4f8b8ff8af15d1102c04aa1486295f]] — JWSign: A Highly Multilingual Corpus of Bible Translations for more Diversity in Sign Language Processing (2023)
- [[e277b9e95d978b0274dbbf5b5fd61988d34c8a56]] — Real-Time Russian Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[33aa057a8268a5965e1682904f4148fbd16cf1ee]] — SignAvatars: A Large-scale 3D Sign Language Holistic Motion Dataset and Benchmark (2023)
- [[d46caaab52995668e9f0eb4cf4e327f6ec1a7cda]] — Intelligent Framework for Auditory and Speech Impaired Individuals by Accelerating Sign Image Analysis using Graph Data Science (2023)
- [[2a60ea36fd8d9c95a745c4fb0d0c4607746ca0d7]] — Unraveling a Decade: A Comprehensive Survey on Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[92ce54389d2ed7412d1b6a11bbbef1b1d7035a5b]] — From Scarcity to Understanding: Transfer Learning for the Extremely Low Resource Irish Sign Language (2023)
- [[522ef67f9c3316c42af569917fe054cd809891a9]] — CoSign: Exploring Co-occurrence Signals in Skeleton-based Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[ff5489559ee1df79a514c84a7728c588a6c8a2e7]] — Exploring Strategies for Modeling Sign Language Phonology (2023)
- [[35d66417916c83ce4c841b344188a6847930e939]] — Best practices for sign language technology research (2023)
- [[17bf59d135cc2d3fac9b5febfaef6751426fcde4]] — Self-Supervised Video Transformers for Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[311f8d2976d6a81642548c3a401c3d0a734b84ba]] — Bornil: An open-source sign language data crowdsourcing platform for AI enabled dialect-agnostic communication (2023)
- [[c34c074093fbbe2c6dcc96eba00c91415fba81c7]] — Sign Language Translation with Iterative Prototype (2023)
- [[f4f8366076f10debf56a9af9e4e95bb728a53139]] — Learnt Contrastive Concept Embeddings for Sign Recognition (2023)
- [[25826421d4461b595d272930b57504f18ebe3cf6]] — Denoising Diffusion for 3D Hand Pose Estimation from Images (2023)
- [[3f73332fc9a0752b5024ff4d39c4b4e016e51ece]] — Is context all you need? Scaling Neural Sign Language Translation to Large Domains of Discourse (2023)
- [[41caef8b6ce66be41ac43b7cae3e4a4eaa4cc888]] — Human Part-wise 3D Motion Context Learning for Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[999d601e4885682b912d328a8732192c3f5c4b7e]] — Sign Language-to-Text Dictionary with Lightweight Transformer Models (2023)
- [[a4ba5d2327a83b25f27ab82ca7cbf4a78797ab5e]] — ISLTranslate: Dataset for Translating Indian Sign Language (2023)
- [[631060d0161be3c3e4951a9301494591152175c9]] — Towards the extraction of robust sign embeddings for low resource sign language recognition (2023)
- [[cc01aeab5627d00f5df8c16dd86265646e44660a]] — Sign Language Translation: A Survey of Approaches and Techniques (2023)
- [[ae78e9011bed042f4af8674fa2a473880aa59204]] — Improving 3D Pose Estimation For Sign Language (2023)
- [[fbbcef51fa1f9a1bd344495d908ea4e3e3f04937]] — Gloss Alignment using Word Embeddings (2023)
- [[03cce8865546b57de2c7609c8956a043a164d27d]] — Re-Evaluation Method by Index Finger Position in the Face Area Using Face Part Position Criterion for Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[0fcc797aeed56bcc127476d5b68836dc402021ea]] — SignBERT+: Hand-Model-Aware Self-Supervised Pre-Training for Sign Language Understanding (2023)
- [[06c8cdd8c517e45adcbb519d77c897aaa6766282]] — Sign Language Translation from Instructional Videos (2023)
- [[dc71677e882665f649a92544da40ba9c81e16fc2]] — Multi-cue temporal modeling for skeleton-based sign language recognition (2023)
- [[18c499092df491b0eb4eed3a1c0266b67a93ae13]] — CiCo: Domain-Aware Sign Language Retrieval via Cross-Lingual Contrastive Learning (2023)
- [[6648bbbb7ad41397d315d1c83ac02a39ac875b19]] — Natural Language-Assisted Sign Language Recognition (2023)
- [[215ce0d01a2824a06c31bf9dd3db9adad784c056]] — A Extensive Survey on Sign Language Recognition Methods (2023)
- [[5306b420260cbbd48ec45fcbd1bf287ee52ff373]] — Fine-tuning of sign language recognition models: a technical report (2023)
- [[60adf4789a6768db98aec4a5911cf90e2b659cdf]] — Improving Sign Recognition with Phonology (2023)
- [[8f4cd7b8deb2d10d136043f711cadeca07700d5a]] — An optimized automated recognition of infant sign language using enhanced convolution neural network and deep LSTM (2023)
- [[919efc30ab8c45456ab72fb4ebeb5e25f2ad7642]] — BEST: BERT Pre-Training for Sign Language Recognition with Coupling Tokenization (2023)
- [[2e55a33e1bf3117039807fd476485d13be8d33f9]] — Hand Anatomy and Neural Network-Based Recognition for Sign Language (2023)
- [[67c7cc453fece3ed8069842bc026c1a75a7f6fc8]] — StepNet: Spatial-temporal Part-aware Network for Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2022)
- [[ce6ded430dd3bdc01a12ef4ca14ee8e350d531dc]] — SLGTformer: An Attention-Based Approach to Sign Language Recognition (2022)
- [[c2886ede64d5adf0e5d00af93adc43cd19da9531]] — Robotic Vision for Human-Robot Interaction and Collaboration: A Survey and Systematic Review (2022)
- [[9d83941a205e31d394f614424cdc553cea9e35f9]] — Tackling Low-Resourced Sign Language Translation: UPC at WMT-SLT 22 (2022)
- [[be9b69dc4be8ba776d17699d31239da8b1373c5f]] — Multilingual Communication System with Deaf Individuals Utilizing Natural and Visual Languages (2022)
- [[aa7ad26452f98caa8b500d8ff338668724a5bb40]] — Ham2Pose: Animating Sign Language Notation into Pose Sequences (2022)
- [[ebdee972a34000c4e7370ca1c996e85d14a438cf]] — A shapelet-based framework for large-scale word-level sign language database auto-construction (2022)
- [[37d445fc4bd873541e7d086968372e4516bbece0]] — Weakly-supervised Fingerspelling Recognition in British Sign Language Videos (2022)
- [[34d8356d29d919955131be29a8358007cec09a86]] — Multimodal Representation Learning For Real-World Applications (2022)
- [[78bc5b0a9fa28ccf2a580f36783e310d436a7874]] — Two-Stream Network for Sign Language Recognition and Translation (2022)
- [[100af4a2171420ebd6b2d60d189e4115b9b4f1cf]] — Signing Outside the Studio: Benchmarking Background Robustness for Continuous Sign Language Recognition (2022)
- [[53ccf6853cc74e73d3f6eb5a8392dcaf01537907]] — A Systematic Mapping of Computer Vision-Based Sign Language Recognition (2022)
- [[53e4247f7743767f39805573c71b820651335d89]] — Clean Text and Full-Body Transformer: Microsoft’s Submission to the WMT22 Shared Task on Sign Language Translation (2022)
- [[3e3b045c46d94b6ff99f53df138465ece09aedb3]] — Weakly-supervised Disentanglement Network for Video Fingerspelling Detection (2022)
- [[cb6feff2db0b8b8301e155608510be71a267c9b2]] — Hierarchical I3D for Sign Spotting (2022)
- [[f9c2127e745a73e34f93e2090bb385adbc74c775]] — A survey on Sign Language machine translation (2022)
- [[6db9eb862d0115810242c1195aa417d32c8ba3a1]] — Sign Language Recognition Using the Reuse of Estimate Results by Each Epoch (2022)
- [[1fc5a46b0ec6c553efd244378367d4313fa2e514]] — Topic Detection in Continuous Sign Language Videos (2022)
- [[dd964ffeb47efb9a3691b5d233e02284ee8228a7]] — Automatic dense annotation of large-vocabulary sign language videos (2022)
- [[bc64a21ee79b730660cfcd51dc656c61f817b5d8]] — Jointly Harnessing Prior Structures and Temporal Consistency for Sign Language Video Generation (2022)
- [[be54fc78e86fb3e65964fbfb904f22eb9927502f]] — Open-Domain Sign Language Translation Learned from Online Video (2022)
- [[6436727f56f247eb04b9ada69d8132215c7df418]] — A Comprehensive Review of Sign Language Recognition: Different Types, Modalities, and Datasets (2022)
- [[581d6519b52a599c35297d85e8f397febbdc2f2d]] — Scaling Up Sign Spotting Through Sign Language Dictionaries (2022)
- [[1b45ce666a230453564d2bb94c3231ec7a476db8]] — Searching for fingerspelled content in American Sign Language (2022)
- [[33703b1bfecb918aea4dcc2644a759f1de37c940]] — A Simple Multi-Modality Transfer Learning Baseline for Sign Language Translation (2022)
- [[c6d2d950b64973f1bec3b0dd0ed46fbf0319351d]] — Towards Zero-Shot Sign Language Recognition (2022)
- [[af49e0dd9684a96b2502b4ebf8f8d1fd7ae66ce4]] — Sign Language Video Retrieval with Free-Form Textual Queries (2022)
- [[dc9a76b7cb690e6a95f0f07bb3d4fabb7181b68d]] — Learning Audio-Visual Speech Representation by Masked Multimodal Cluster Prediction (2022)
- [[3ff87e3fd1eec291cbd20b3ff0b01a2cf9dd24c7]] — Transcribing Natural Languages for The Deaf via Neural Editing Programs (2021)
- [[a803d1ae34f737232b84809ddd39742097b42f09]] — Audio-Visual Synchronisation in the wild (2021)
- [[3826b47d3e8a7ef99d8c757c778e7d11633df84e]] — BBC-Oxford British Sign Language Dataset (2021)
- [[e791ab125e0ed8c74ad3cd056d7a3537b2c90ac2]] — Visual Keyword Spotting with Attention (2021)
- [[4661b8373ad6de37124854c39e0d88839ca31c15]] — Using Motion History Images With 3D Convolutional Networks in Isolated Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[2dc5bd35be89eaa336384a3b8cd4b611485c1602]] — OpenHands: Making Sign Language Recognition Accessible with Pose-based Pretrained Models across Languages (2021)
- [[c7ba1a2b7363301328162bb31ea6d2155cf4977b]] — Sign Language Recognition via Skeleton-Aware Multi-Model Ensemble (2021)
- [[39c6076a1284324282d6234c033ef1539c959039]] — SignBERT: Pre-Training of Hand-Model-Aware Representation for Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[aa9d23b4db9b6aa81ee2a8c68575cdf34aad6b59]] — Isolated Video-Based Arabic Sign Language Recognition Using Convolutional and Recursive Neural Networks (2021)
- [[5bc001768260a81dd56f7aa1b686b3737e97434a]] — Artificial Intelligence Technologies for Sign Language (2021)
- [[e4cb99db8683e92148f6cfed490cb87d9ec80c12]] — Looking for the Signs: Identifying Isolated Sign Instances in Continuous Video Footage (2021)
- [[d4c9a164430951e9e7d505dc72e35fdaa7da6c39]] — SeeHear: Signer Diarisation and a New Dataset (2021)
- [[47569cf3ac6ff779f22556f863ccb6cf751597ab]] — Mutual Support of Data Modalities in the Task of Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[7208c268c068b6139e12986da4c1171916524554]] — Isolated Sign Recognition from RGB Video using Pose Flow and Self-Attention (2021)
- [[7811df11a75f58646d04b3132d35f0656e50a109]] — Improving Sign Language Translation with Monolingual Data by Sign Back-Translation (2021)
- [[832298578168aacc3fb1433296a63dbfa849ee4e]] — Hand-Model-Aware Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[ad9d96b2871afed5c016f6da95da8cbb55e12bcd]] — Aligning Subtitles in Sign Language Videos (2021)
- [[f6f3266e92f508b84bd0e81585215c95bc4c3da9]] — Sign Segmentation with Changepoint-Modulated Pseudo-Labelling (2021)
- [[7663a568ce56a0ce232a06d59b927b2e7010ab48]] — Evaluating the Immediate Applicability of Pose Estimation for Sign Language Recognition (2021)
- [[8662341e6e124cf7b207b9c7d7fdbe73fabbf530]] — Fingerspelling Detection in American Sign Language (2021)
- [[95c466170f60cc5a652b51ec23814320666a4f73]] — Read and Attend: Temporal Localisation in Sign Language Videos (2021)
- [[f3f80da516fc1b14cacbd7b76fbd056103cb0996]] — A Survey on the Techniques Applied to the Recognition and Conversion of Indian Sign Language (2020)
- [[7dbd6b630d37384c90b05ac3e05c2eeb88537fdd]] — Sign Language Segmentation with Temporal Convolutional Networks (2020)
- [[16091f0821502b70294ef66671183dadd1afcdc0]] — TSPNet: Hierarchical Feature Learning via Temporal Semantic Pyramid for Sign Language Translation (2020)
- [[631bbcce16387e76e4780d7c84b07b2a37d6bfc4]] — Watch, read and lookup: learning to spot signs from multiple supervisors (2020)
- [[0835f6c5094b6d1b164f02f31a7234b82177c913]] — Seeing wake words: Audio-visual Keyword Spotting (2020)
- [[5b8ec500aedc97cc9874a9eb601cef37c5f38e3f]] — Quantitative Survey of the State of the Art in Sign Language Recognition (2020)
- [[932168d1c27390506049adf679b42d3aac53f61c]] — How2Sign: A Large-scale Multimodal Dataset for Continuous American Sign Language (2020)
- [[ae54f793fea52abfb25c374640bb3a33042c28c9]] — Korean Sign Language Recognition and Sentence Generation through Data Augmentation (2026)
- [[71fc03de312ff4e68dce65b4be8f1a8bd6c09522]] — Unsupervised Hand Tracking for Sign Language Recognition via Optical Flow and Previous Tracking Data (2026)
- [[bc3522570d61d1996695758fda95c7cb227e8ead]] — A Lightweight Solution for Pose-Based Recognition for Isolated Spanish Sign Language Using Recurrent Models (2026)
- [[650307c9468d39ca220a507abb7f5ecb146bec06]] — Deep Learning Approaches for Continuous Sign Language Recognition: A Comprehensive Review (2025)
- [[9c0f3840374e9df47ddf2433243dc78e7fabaa54]] — Head and Hands Tunneling Pipeline for Enhancing Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[15d1f938bec70e04f6833d5a8fff58b15d11f9d9]] — From Data to Signs: A Foundation Model for Multilingual Sign Language Recognition (2025)
- [[8338efc35e1031340ad4be16847a504d1feb8cad]] — Hand and Pose-Based Feature Selection for Zero-Shot Sign Language Recognition (2024)
- [[30bc42dcc97e1a14d0ff9e0db9d1efb58d398846]] — A Comprehensive Review of Recent Advances in Deep Neural Networks for Lipreading With Sign Language Recognition (2024)
- [[fd1a7911eeef156b38ed5500057b1941cd2fa122]] — A Comprehensive Benchmark and Evaluation of Thai Finger Spelling in Multi-Modal Deep Learning Models (2024)
- [[10d0aba02f182a94fde63c540e62534aee2827b1]] — Visual Alignment Pre-training for Sign Language Translation (2024)
- [[494992efca7b41d8d905ff2d2c76039592bd7ff5]] — Exploring the Importance of Sign Language Phonology for a Deep Neural Network (2023)
- [[3dc3fabfb9ebb6afb6d0702dca08412a74b1b3fc]] — Trends and Challenges for Sign Language Recognition with Machine Learning (2023)
- [[004e899e779d5f27e2b3ae19533272d68a3769e3]] — Auslan-Daily: Australian Sign Language Translation for Daily Communication and News (2023)
- [[e268817678bbc27c75c23f46a911da27c4ad9b14]] — AT 4 SSL Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Automatic Translation for Signed and Spoken Languages 15 June 2023 (2023)
- [[b200dd704aa43cc0b49ffa6455f2f6003c677063]] — BSL-Hansard: A parallel, multimodal corpus of English and interpreted British Sign Language data from parliamentary proceedings (2023)
- [[81c03a26af98522bacd6cf566807fc08d596dada]] — TTIC’s Submission to WMT-SLT 23 (2023)
- [[9cd8913cdf45ea2b242ec4fcf3f1da25da53fc86]] — KnowComp Submission for WMT23 Sign Language Translation Task (2023)
- [[604cc00ff6a4d57d97856b49be4df89452cf30a8]] — Findings of the Second WMT Shared Task on Sign Language Translation (WMT-SLT23) (2023)
- [[0bdc81a6f58f2d48c090fbada9bc8c32d111b5d5]] — Chapter 3. The basic units of LIS (2022)
- [[6e27ec6081ba16805e482805d1f6dc681585f437]] — Chapter 4. Constructing sentences in LIS (2022)
- [[f31e40b1236b224cd3b777764ba72aed980e74f1]] — Chapter 5. Variation and change in LIS (2022)
- [[51c2f7bb0792dfe6dc83f55741e134c0466224b3]] — Italian Sign Language from a Cognitive and Socio-semiotic Perspective (2022)
- [[cc9241a2922ac85173ad60db04f3e151c5bfdc46]] — Automatic Gloss Dictionary for Sign Language Learners (2022)
- [[ce51cd18b4cc02e4322a4e2ca43e83f18cf03dbd]] — Towards Large Vocabulary Kazakh-Russian Sign Language Dataset: KRSL-OnlineSchool (2022)
- [[bce54ad9184fec6b5ad3787855ebf94ca1f0af64]] — PeruSIL: A Framework to Build a Continuous Peruvian Sign Language Interpretation Dataset (2022)
- [[e875f4ac6a4ec6a5fdfd7246a455dbb31ee41d6b]] — Deep Radial Embedding for Visual Sequence Learning (2022)
- [[dfe0315936e55c01484cd5dc36661d42f405b592]] — CISLR: Corpus for Indian Sign Language Recognition (2022)

## Sources

- title: semanticscholar
- abstract: semanticscholar
- authors: semanticscholar
- topics: semanticscholar
- references: semanticscholar
- citations: semanticscholar
- fullText: ar5iv
- bibtex: semanticscholar
